NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS
FOR SYMPLECTIC FERMIONS

arXiv:2307.06069v2 [math.QA] 14 Apr 2026

Johannes Berger a , Azat M. Gainutdinov b and Ingo Runkel c 1
a Département de Mathématique, Université Libre de Bruxelles,

Campus de la Plaine, Boulevard du Triomphe, 1050 Bruxelles, Belgium
b Institut Denis Poisson, CNRS, Université de Tours,

Parc de Grandmont, 37200 Tours, France
c Fachbereich Mathematik, Universität Hamburg

Bundesstraße 55, 20146 Hamburg, Germany
Abstract. We consider the link and three-manifold invariants in [DGGPR1],
which are defined in terms of certain non-semisimple ribbon categories C (locallyfinite for link invariants, finite for manifold invariants) together with a choice of
tensor ideal and modified trace. If the ideal is all of C, these invariants agree with
those defined by Lyubashenko in the 90’s. We show that in that case the invariants depend on the objects labelling the link only through their simple composition
factors. In order to detect non-trivial extensions one needs to pass to proper ideals.
We compute examples of link and three-manifold invariants for C being the category of N pairs of symplectic fermions. Using a quasi-Hopf algebra realisation of C,
we find that the Lyubashenko-invariant of a lens space is equal to the order of its
first homology group to the power N , a relation we conjecture to hold for all threemanifolds with finite first homology group. For N ≥ 2, C allows for tensor ideals I
with a modified trace which are different from all of C and from the projective ideal.
Using the theory of pull-back traces and symmetrised cointegrals, we show that the
link invariant obtained from I can distinguish a continuum of indecomposable but
reducible objects which all have the same composition series.

1Emails: johannes.berger@ulb.be, azat.gainutdinov@cnrs.fr,

ingo.runkel@uni-hamburg.de

2

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

Contents
1. Introduction
1.1. Invariants of ribbon graphs
1.2. Invariants of three-manifolds
1.3. Detailed computations
2. Link invariants from tensor ideals and modified traces
2.1. Tensor categories
2.2. Tensor ideals
2.3. Modified traces on tensor ideals
2.4. Invariants of C-coloured ribbon graphs and links
2.5. Examples of link invariants for symplectic fermions
3. Invariants of closed 3-manifolds
3.1. Twist non-degeneracy, unimodularity, and factorisability
3.2. Bichrome graphs and their invariants
3.3. Definition and properties of the manifold invariant
3.4. Example: Lens spaces
4. Quasi-Hopf algebras, tensor ideals and modified traces
4.1. Quasi-Hopf algebras and their modules
4.2. Modified traces on H M and Proj(H M)
4.3. Lyubashenko coend and integral
4.4. Pullback ideals from quasi-Hopf subalgebras
5. The symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf algebras
5.1. Quasi-Hopf algebra and ribbon structure
5.2. The modular tensor category Q M
5.3. Pullback ideals
6. Explicit computations of link invariants
6.1. Framed unknot
6.2. Framed Hopf link
6.3. Torus knot
7. Lens space invariants for symplectic fermions
7.1. Lens space invariants for quasi-Hopf algebras
7.2. The central element fd
(a) for symplectic fermions
7.3. Categorical trace: Lyubashenko invariant
7.4. Modified trace: Renormalised Lyubashenko invariant
7.5. Pullback trace
Appendix A. More on continued fractions
References

3
3
6
8
9
9
10
12
16
18
22
23
25
28
31
36
36
40
41
42
44
44
46
49
54
54
55
56
60
60
62
65
65
71
72
74

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

3

1. Introduction
While a large body of research on semisimple Reshetikhin-Turaev type invariants
of three-manifolds has been accumulated since their inception in the 90ies, much
less is known about quantum invariants obtained from non-semisimple input data.
After initial successes of obtaining three-manifold invariants from non-semisimple
Hopf algebras by Hennings [He], and from modular tensor categories which need not
be semisimple by Lyubashenko [Lyu], the next significant step forward came only
with the introduction of modified traces on tensor ideals and using these to define
link invariants by Geer, Kujawa, Patureau-Mirand, and Turaev [GPT, GKP1]. This
led to the definition of three-manifold invariants by Costantino, Geer, and PatureauMirand [CGP1], and three-dimensional topological field theories via non-semisimple
modular tensor categories and variants thereof [BCGP, DGP, DGGPR1]. The nonsemisimple topological field theories of [DGGPR1] recover the original ReshetikhinTuraev theory in the semisimple case, as well as the mapping class group actions
found by Lyubashenko in the non-semisimple case [DGGPR2].
Our focus here is on non-semisimple link and three-manifold invariants, and not
on topological field theory. The purpose of the present paper is two-fold:
(a) We exhibit a number of general properties of the non-semisimple invariants
defined in [DGGPR1] which set them apart from the semisimple case, and
from Lyubashenko’s invariant.
(b) We take one example of a modular tensor category – that of symplectic
fermions [Ru, FGR2] – as input datum and provide explicit computations of
some basic invariants. We hope this example based exposition can be useful
as a guide to the rather technical definition of the invariants in [DGGPR1].
If we should single out one property as particularly interesting then it would be that
non-semisimple invariants are able to distinguish a continuum of indecomposable but
reducible objects which all have the same composition series. In other words, these
invariants are able to detect extensions and not just the composition series, in contrast
to the Lyubashenko invariant.
This paper splits into two parts of roughly equal length. The first part consists of
Sections 2 and 3 and contains the result for point (a) and summarises the findings
of the explicit computations in (b). The second part, Sections 4–7, provides all the
technical and lengthy details that went into the results in (b).
We will now give a quick overview of the contents of the first part of the paper.
Throughout this introduction we fix
C : a locally finite ribbon tensor category over an alg. closed field k .
In particular, C is rigid and abelian, each object has finite length, Hom-spaces are
finite-dimensional, and the tensor unit is simple. The ribbon structure endows C with
a pivotal structure and a braiding, which may be degenerate.
1.1. Invariants of ribbon graphs. In Sections 2 we focus on invariants of ribbon
graphs in R3 (or, equivalently, in S 3 ). These depend on the choice of a tensor ideal I

4

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

in C and on a modified trace on I. Let us describe some properties of these ingredients
and the resulting invariants in turn.
Tensor ideals. A tensor ideal I ⊂ C is a full subcategory that is closed under tensoring
with arbitrary objects in C and under taking direct summands in the sense that if
X ⊕ Y ∈ I, then also X, Y ∈ I. The two canonical examples are I = C and
I = Proj(C), the full subcategory of projective objects in C. In fact, any non-zero
tensor ideal I satisfies
Proj(C) ⊂ I ⊂ C .
We note that Proj(C) can be zero for C non-semisimple (Example 2.2). But if
Proj(C) ̸= 0, then C admits a non-zero proper ideal if and only if C is not semisimple (Proposition 2.4). Thus the freedom to choose a tensor ideal is present only
for C non-semisimple.
In this work, the main sources of tensor ideals I that are not C or Proj(C), and that
we call intermediate, are given by subcategories of all objects in C with the property
that their image under a monoidal functor C → D is in a tensor ideal of D, e.g. in
Proj(D). We refer to such ideals as pullback ideals.
Modified traces. A modified trace on a tensor ideal I is a family of linear maps
t = {tX : EndC (X) → k}X∈I
which induce symmetric pairings C(X, Y )×C(Y, X) → k for X, Y ∈ I, and which satisfy a partial trace compatibility condition with the categorical trace on C, see [GKP1].
In fact, the categorical trace trCX (f ), f ∈ EndC (X) of C – defined in terms of the duality maps of C – is the unique-up-to-scalar modified trace on all of C. The usefulness
of modified traces derives from the observation that while the categorical trace is
identically zero on any proper tensor ideal (Lemma 2.6), it may be possible to find
non-zero modified traces on a given tensor ideal I.
An important way to obtain modified traces on intermediate tensor ideals in C
is via pullback of the tensor ideal Proj(D) ⊂ D along a pivotal monoidal functor
C → D, see [FOG] and Proposition 2.11. Indeed, suppose D has enough projective
objects and is unimodular (i.e. the projective cover P1 → 1 of the tensor unit also
has socle 1). Then there is a unique-up-to-scalar modified trace on Proj(D) and for
each non-zero such trace the above symmetric pairing is non-degenerate, see [BBG,
Thm. 1] for the case of Hopf algebras and [GKP3, Cor. 5.6] for the general case.
Invariants of I-admissible ribbon graphs. Let I ⊂ C be a tensor ideal and tX a
modified trace on I. A C-coloured ribbon graph T in R3 is called I-admissible
if at least one edge is coloured by an object X ∈ I. For such a T one obtains an
invariant FC,′ t (T ) of T by cutting an I-labelled edge and taking the modified trace (see
[GPT, DGGPR1] and Theorem 2.13). In particular, this prescription is independent
of which I-labelled edge is chosen in the cutting procedure. If T is a framed link, the
invariant FC,′ t (T ) depends on objects colouring components not used in the cutting
procedure only through their class in the Grothendieck ring of C (Corollary 2.15). If
I = C, this also holds for the component used in the cutting procedure. Thus, in order

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

5

to detect any structure of the objects colouring the link other than their composition
series, one needs to work with a proper ideal I ⊊ C. This illustrates once more that
tensor ideals and modified traces are crucial for non-semisimple invariants.
Symplectic fermion example. To see how the non-semisimple invariants FC,′ t (T ) behave in a concrete example, we consider the category Q M of finite-dimensional left
modules over Q = Q(N, β), the symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf algebra. As an algebra
it is the semidirect product of Z2 with the direct sum of a Graßmann algebra and a
Clifford algebra in 2N generators each. The parameter β ∈ C satisfies β 4 = (−1)N .
Symplectic fermions were introduced in the context of two-dimensional conformal
field theory [Ka, GK] and the vertex operator algebra was studied in [Ab]. A corresponding modular tensor category was proposed in [DR, Ru] and was expressed
as representations of a factorisable ribbon quasi-Hopf algebra in [GR1, FGR2]. In
[GN, CLR] it was shown that for N = 1, Q M is indeed ribbon-equivalent to the
representation category of the symplectic fermion vertex operator algebra, see also
[MR] for recent progress on general N .
The categories Q M are comparatively easy to handle. For example, they always
have four simple objects, but the maximal composition length of indecomposable
projective modules increases with N and is given by 22N . The category Q M is a finite
ribbon tensor category and is modular, i.e. the braiding satisfies a non-degeneracy
condition.
The symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf algebra Q can be understood as a version of
the quantum group of type BN at q = i [FL]. Note that the parameter is the
rank while the root of unity is kept fixed. In the other class of standard examples,
namely small quantum groups for sl(2), as in [Lyu, FGST, CGR], the parameter is
the order of the root of unity. These two classes of examples probe different aspects
of non-semisimple invariants: For BN the number of simple objects is always 4 and
the maximal composition length of their projective covers increases, while for sl(2)
the maximal composition length of projective covers is 4, but the number of simple
objects increases.
For Q M we compute invariants of the unknot and the Hopf link with different
framings, and of torus knots for the tensor ideals Q M, Proj(Q M) and, importantly,
also for a choice of intermediate ideal I (in the case N = 2). The ideal I and
a modified trace tI on it are obtained via the pullback construction specialised to
quasi-Hopf algebras, see Section 4.4.
The results are listed in Table 1 from Section 2.5. Most interestingly, the intermediate ideal we consider contains a continuum of mutually non-isomorphic indecomposable objects which all have the same composition series made out of 4 simple objects.
The family we consider can be conveniently parameterised by a complex 2 × 2-matrix
µ ∈ Mat2 (C), and we denote the corresponding representation of Q by Pµ ∈ I. For a
ribbon graph T coloured by such Pµ , it turns out that the corresponding invariants
FC,′ tI (T ) can depend continuously on µ. For example the invariant of O(n, Pµ ), the
n-framed unknot coloured by Pµ , is




FC,′ tI O(n, Pµ ) = 2n(1 + det(µ)) .

6

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

Such a dependence on continuous parameters can never happen for the extremal
choices I = C and I = Proj(C) for the tensor ideal in a finite tensor category, see
Remark 2.17 for more details.
Let us also mention that in some cases, the invariants based on the intermediate
ideal I are topologically stronger (i.e. able to distinguish more knots) than those
based on the ideal Proj(C), see a discussion in the last item (3) in Section 2.5.
1.2. Invariants of three-manifolds. In Section 3 we work with stronger assumptions:
C is in addition finite, unimodular, and twist-nondegenrate .
Finiteness means that there are only finitely many isomorphism classes of simple objects and that C has enough projective objects. Unimodularity was already mentioned
above, and twist-nondegeneracy will be explained below. All of these conditions hold
for modular tensor categories, see [DGGPR1, Prop. 2.6], and in particular for Q M.
Fix a tensor ideal I ⊂ C and a modified trace t on I. We consider invariants of
(closed, oriented) three-manifolds with embedded I-admissible ribbon graphs. We
equally consider Lyubashenko invariants of three-manifolds. For the latter there are
no restrictions on the embedded ribbon graph, in particular it is allowed to be empty.
Surgery invariants. The invariants we study are obtained as surgery invariants, and
we need to extend our definition of the invariants FC,′ t of I-admissible ribbon graphs
to so-called bichrome graphs. These consist of an ordinary ribbon graph, called
“blue” and the surgery link called “red”. The red component does not carry further
labels. The invariant of bichrome graphs needs another ingredient to evaluate the red
part, namely the universal Hopf algebra L in C, defined as a coend, and the integral
Λ : 1 → L, unique up to a scalar. We review the slightly intricate construction of the
′
corresponding invariant FΛ,
t (T ) from [DGP, DGGPR1] in Section 3.2.
Let M be an oriented closed three-manifold and T a (blue) I-admissible ribbon
graph embedded in M . One can show that
′
L′Λ, t (M, T ) = D −1−ℓ(L) δ −σ(L) FΛ,
t (L ∪ T )

is a topological invariant of the pair (M, T ). Here, L is a surgery link representing M ,
and ℓ(L) and σ(L) are the number of components and the signature of the surgery link
L, respectively. At this point one needs C to be twist-nondegenerate, which means
′
that FΛ,
t (O± ) ̸= 0 for O± the red ±1-framed unknot. This is necessary to achieve
invariance under the Kirby 1-move (stabilisation). See [DGGPR1] and Theorem 3.6
for details and for the definition of the constants D and δ.
The original non-semisimple invariant defined by Lyubashenko [Lyu] is recovered
by taking I = C and tX to be the categorical trace trCX :
LyuΛ (M, T ) = L′Λ, trC (M, T ) .
The strong point of Lyubashenko’s invariant is that it can be defined for just the
three-manifold M without an embedded ribbon graph (since one can always insert a

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

7

loop labelled by 1). On the downside, LyuΛ (M, T ) is often zero. For example, if C is
modular, then
LyuΛ (S 2 × S 1 , ∅) = 0
if and only if C is non-semisimple (Proposition 3.13), and LyuΛ (M, T ) = 0 for all M
if T contains an edge labelled by an object in a proper tensor ideal (Corollary 3.11).
The price to pay to do better than LyuΛ (M, T ) is that one needs to include an
I-admissible ribbon graph in M . Furthermore, the ribbon graph must wrap nontrivially around the surgery link of M , or else the invariant reduces to LyuΛ (M, ∅)
times the link invariant FC,′ t (T ) discussed above (Proposition 3.10).
Lens space invariants in the symplectic fermion example. Fix two positive coprime
integers p, q. The lens spaces L(p, q) are by definition a quotient of S 3 = SU (2)
by a q-dependent action of Z/pZ. A surgery presentation can be obtained from a
continued fraction expansion of pq . We give a general expression for L′Λ, t (L(p, q), T ),
where T is a loop bounding a disc (thus reducing to Lyubashenko’s invariant as given
for L(p, q) already in [Lyu]), and where T wraps a non-trivial cycle, i.e. is linked
non-trivially with L (Proposition 3.16). In the symplectic fermion example C = Q M,
Q = Q(N, β) we find
LyuΛ (L(p, q)) = pN .
Since |H1 (L(p, q))| = p, this leads us to
conjecture:

LyuΛ (M ) =


0
|H1 (M )|

N

; H1 (M ) infinite
; else

for all closed 3-manifolds M . This conjecture for symplectic fermions fits into a series
of observations relating non-semisimple and semisimple invariants which we briefly
recall in Section 3.4, where we also discuss a possible generalisation to other modular
tensor categories.
Next we choose the projective ideal and T the loop wrapping a (specific) non-trivial
cycle coloured by the projective cover P1 of the tensor unit. We get




L′Λ, t L(p, q), T (P1 ) = 12 c + 21 β 2 q N ,
where c ∈ {0} ∪ {β m |m ∈ Z} is determined recursively from the continued fraction expansion (Theorem 3.18). Note that this is no longer just an invariant of the
lens space L(p, q), but it depends on our choice of cycle wrapped by T . Indeed,
L(p, q) ∼
= L(p, q + p) as manifolds, but the above expression is not invariant under
this substitution.
The most interesting case is again that of the intermediate ideal (again N = 2). In
that case we find for T the non-trivial loop as above and labelled by Pµ , µ ∈ Mat2 (C)
(Theorem 3.20):




L′Λ, tI L(p, q), T (Pµ ) = −2pq(1 + det(µ)) .
To the best of our knowledge, our results provide the first explicit computation
of the behaviour of quantum invariants under variation of the choice of tensor ideal,
including an intermediate tensor ideal. It would also be interesting to calculate

8

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

invariants associated to ideals with modified traces in pivotal tensor categories as
constructed in [GKP3], but this is outside the scope of our paper.
1.3. Detailed computations. In Section 4, we review in detail our conventions
for (pivotal, quasi-triangular, ribbon) quasi-Hopf algebras H. Then we recall the
construction of modified traces on the projective ideal of the category H M of finitedimensional left H-modules. This uses the theory [BGR1] of symmetrised (co)integrals
of H which is a quasi-Hopf generalisation of the construction in [BBG]. Using the
right integral of H, in Section 4.3 we calculate the integral Λ : 1 → L of the universal Hopf algebra L ∈ C, following [BGR2], and characterise the twist-nondegeneracy
condition in quasi-Hopf terms. We then describe in Section 4.4 how to get intermediate tensor ideals and modified traces from suitable quasi-Hopf subalgebras, see the
precise statement in Corollary 4.6.
In Section 5 we review the definition of the family of non-semisimple symplectic
fermion quasi-Hopf algebras from [FGR2]. We show that Q M is prime in the sense
of [LW]. Then we return to the pullback construction, and give an explicit example
of a sub-quasi Hopf algebra A in H = Q(2, β). We introduce a family of H-modules
Pµ , bijectively parameterised by complex (2 × 2)-matrices µ, which are lifts of the
projective cover of the tensor unit in A M. After having established some properties
of these modules, we compute the pullback modified trace on the pullback ideal of
Proj(A M) in H M.
Section 6 consists of the computations of the various (framed) link invariants first
presented at the end of Section 2.
Section 7 contains expressions for lens space invariants (both for empty manifolds
and with I-admissible ribbon graphs) in terms of quasi-Hopf data, see Proposition 7.1,
where all tensor ideals are treated on equal footing via certain (possibly degenerate)
bilinear form on the centre of the quasi-Hopf algebra. Then, we finally give the
explicit computation for Q M using the SL(2, Z) action on the centre of Q computed
in [FGR2].
Acknowledgements. The authors would like to thank Christian Blanchet, Marco
de Renzi, Ehud Meir, Vincentas Mulevičius, Kenichi Shimizu, and Joost Vercruysse
for answers, comments, remarks, and helpful discussions. We also thank the referees
for many helpful suggestions and improvements to the paper. JB is supported by the
Fédération Wallonie-Bruxelles through a postdoctoral fellowship in the framework of
the actions de recherche concertées-grant “From algebra to combinatorics, and back”.
The work of AMG was supported by the CNRS, and partially by the ANR grant JCJC
ANR-18-CE40-0001 and the RSF Grant No. 20-61-46005. AMG is also grateful to
Hamburg University for its kind hospitality in 2022. IR is partially supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft via the Cluster of Excellence EXC 2121 “Quantum
Universe” - 390833306.
Conventions. Throughout an algebraically closed field k of arbitrary characteristic
is fixed, and all linear structures will be considered over it. All functors between
linear categories are assumed to be linear.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

9

2. Link invariants from tensor ideals and modified traces
In this section we start by reviewing some parts of the theory of tensor ideals and
modified traces and how to use these to define link invariants, as developed in [GPT,
GKP1, GKP2, GPV]. We prove some general properties of the resulting invariants.
The main result in this section is the observation that – in the example we consider
– working with an intermediate tensor ideal allows one to detect internal structure
of indecomposable (but reducible) objects not visible to invariants build from either
of the two canonical ideals, i.e. the whole category or the subcategory of projective
objects. Invariants for the intermediate ideal may also distinguish knots which the
two canonical ideals cannot, in our example certain knots from their mirrors.
2.1. Tensor categories. Following [EGNO] by a tensor category we mean a linear
abelian category which
• is locally finite (finite-dimensional Hom-spaces and every object has finite
length)
• is monoidal with bilinear tensor product ⊗ and simple tensor unit 1,2
• is rigid, i.e. each object has a left and a right dual with corresponding evaluation and coevaluation morphisms, see below.
Recall that an object P ∈ C is projective iff the associated Hom-functor C(P, −) is
exact. A projective cover of an object X ∈ C is an epimorphism
pX : P X → X
with PX projective, such that every epimorphism P → X with P projective factors
epimorphically through pX . We note that we do not require the existence of projective
covers in C. However, if 1 does have a projective cover P1 , and if the socle (the largest
semisimple subobject) of P1 is also 1, then C is called unimodular.
A tensor category with finitely many isomorphism classes of simple objects and
where every object has a projective cover is called a finite tensor category. A fusion
category is a semisimple finite tensor category. Without loss of generality, we will
assume monoidal categories to be strictly unital and associative.3
For the rest of this section C is a tensor category in the above sense. We denote
by Irr(C) a set of representatives of isomorphism classes of simple objects, and agree
that 1 ∈ Irr(C). A choice of projective cover (if it exists) of a simple object U ∈ Irr(C)
shall be denoted by pU : PU → U . Our notation for left and right duals of an object
X is X ∨ and ∨X, and the evaluation and coevaluation morphisms are
evX : X ∨ ⊗ X → 1,

efvX : X ⊗ ∨X → 1

and
coevX : 1 → X ⊗ X ∨ ,

g X : 1 → ∨X ⊗ X ,
coev

2In [EGNO, Def. 4.1.1] it is instead assumed that End(1) = k, however the tensor unit is neces-

sarily simple due to [EGNO, Thm. 4.3.8].
3The strictness assumption is made only in Sections 2 and 3 for simplicity of exposition. In
the technical example computations in Sections 4–7 we work with quasi-Hopf algebras, and their
representation categories are non-strict.

10

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

respectively. We will employ graphical calculus in the form of string diagrams, which
in our convention are read from bottom to top. Thus e.g. the left evaluation and
coevaluation morphisms for X are drawn as
X
evX =

and
X∨

coevX =

X∨
.

X

To C is associated its Grothendieck ring Gr(C). This is, as an abelian group,
generated by objects of C modulo the relations X + Z = Y in Gr(C) iff there is a
short exact sequence 0 → X → Y → Z → 0 in C; we denote the class of X ∈ C in
Gr(C) by [X]. The multiplication determined by [X] · [Y ] = [X ⊗ Y ] is well-defined
because ⊗ is exact by [EGNO, Prop. 4.2.1]. The Grothendieck ring is in fact freely
generated over Z by Irr(C): every object X ∈ C possesses a finite composition series,
in which the simple object U occurs [X : U ] times; if U has a projective cover then
[X : U ] = dimk C(PU , X), see [EGNO, Sec. 1.8]. Thus the class of any X ∈ C can
be written as a sum over classes of simple objects U with multiplicity [X : U ]. In
particular, there are structure constants NUWV = [U ⊗ V : W ] ∈ N such that
[X] · [Y ] =

X

[X : U ] [Y : V ] NUWV [W ]

(2.1)

U,V,W ∈Irr(C)

for all X, Y ∈ C.
2.2. Tensor ideals. A right tensor ideal I of C (or right ideal for short) is a full
subcategory such that
• for all X ∈ I and V ∈ C, also X ⊗ V ∈ I, and
• it is closed under retracts, i.e. if Z ∈ I and Z ∼
= X ⊕ Y , then also X, Y ∈ I.
Note that by the second condition, ideals are replete, i.e. if X ∼
= Y with X ∈ I, then
Y ∈ I. The definition of left and two-sided ideals in C is analogous. We will refer to
two-sided ideals just as ideals.
Example 2.1. Two trivial examples of ideals are the subcategory consisting of only
the zero object, as well as the category C itself. An important example of an ideal is
the subcategory of projective objects, which we denote by Proj(C). Indeed, closure
under tensor products from both sides follows from [EGNO, Prop. 4.2.12], and closure
under retracts is the statement that direct summands of projective objects are again
projective.
Example 2.2. It can happen that C has no nonzero projective objects, i.e. that
Proj(C) = 0, and in fact that there are no nonzero proper right tensor ideals at all.
As a simple example consider the Hopf algebra H = C[X], the polynomial ring in
one variable, with coproduct ∆(X) = X ⊗ 1 + 1 ⊗ X. Let C be the tensor category of
finite-dimensional H-modules. The nonzero indecomposable objects are Jm (q), given
by an m-dimensional vector space on which X acts via a single Jordan block with
q ∈ C along the diagonal. The projective cover of each Jm (q) would be the infinite

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

11

Jordan block C[X] ⊗ J1 (q), which is not contained in C. To see that there are no
proper non-zero right ideals, note that the tensor product decomposes as4
min(m,n)

Jm (p) ⊗ Jn (q) =

M

Jm+n+1−2k (p + q) for all m, n ∈ Z>0 and p, q ∈ C .

k=1

Hence, if a right ideal I contains the indecomposable Jm (p), it also contains the
tensor unit J1 (0) as it occurs as a direct summand in Jm (p) ⊗ Jm (−p), so that I = C.
Remark 2.3. C is braided if it is equipped with a natural isomorphism with components
Y
X
cX,Y =

∼

: X ⊗Y −
→Y ⊗X

X
Y
called the braiding, satisfying the hexagon axioms, see e.g. [EGNO, Ch. 8]. The
inverse is drawn with the opposite crossing. Since ideals are replete, there is no
distinction between left, right and two-sided ideals in a braided category.
△
Let I be a (two-sided) ideal in C. Then I is closed under taking duals, i.e. X ∈ I
implies X ∨ , ∨X ∈ I, see [GKP1, Lem. 3.1.2]. For example, the zig-zag identities for
the left duality maps exhibit X ∨ as a retract of X ∨ ⊗ X ⊗ X ∨ .
The next proposition shows that the projective ideal Proj(C) is the smallest nonzero ideal. It is a slight adaptation of [GKP1, Lem. 4.4.1] as we do not assume C to
be braided. To give the precise statement, we need some notation. We say that a
right tensor ideal I is generated by P ∈ C, written I = (P ), if every object Q ∈ I
can be obtained as a retract of P ⊗ X for some X ∈ C. For example, the ideal
generated by 1 is the entire category. The ideals of C ordered by inclusion of full
subcategories form a poset, which immediately yields the notion of a sub-ideal. Note
that the intersection I ∩ J of two ideals (which is a well-defined operation on replete
subcategories) is a sub-ideal in I and in J .
Proposition 2.4. Let C be a tensor category. Then:
(1) If I is a non-zero right or left ideal in C, then Proj(C) is a sub-ideal of I.
In particular, Proj(C) contains no right or left sub-ideal other than zero and
itself.
Suppose now that Proj(C) ̸= 0. Then:
(2) Proj(C) = (P ) for any non-zero projective object P .
(3) C admits a non-zero proper ideal if and only if C is not semisimple.
Proof. To see (1), assume first that I is a right ideal in C. Let X ∈ I and P ∈ Proj(C).
Since I is a right ideal and Proj(C) is an ideal, we have X ⊗ ∨X ⊗ P ∈ I ∩ Proj(C).
∼
1
m (0) = Jm (q), and then note that Jm (0) is just the
m-dimensional representation of a nilpotent part of sl2 .
4To see this, first check that J (q) ⊗ J

12

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

To show that this intersection is Proj(C), consider the epimorphism:
ev
e

⊗ id

P
X ⊗ ∨X ⊗ P −−X−−−→
P ,

where we used that the right evaluation morphism efvX is epi due to simplicity of the
tensor unit and that the tensor product is exact, i.e. it preserves epimorphisms. This
epimorphism has a section due to projectivity of P , and thus P is a retract of an
object in I. The statement for left ideals in C is proven similarly using left duals and
left evaluation maps.
The show (2) observe that (P ) is a non-zero right subideal in Proj(C) because it
contains P , and therefore by (1) this subideal consists of all projective objects.
Lastly, for (3) note that
(∗)

C is semisimple ⇐⇒ 1 ∈ Proj(C)
by (2)

⇐⇒ Proj(C) = (1) = C

by (1)

⇐⇒ the smallest non-trivial ideal is C itself ,

where the implication ⇐= of (∗) follows from X ∼
= X ⊗ 1 for every X ∈ C together
with the fact that the ideal of projectives is replete.
□
We note that the assumption Proj(C) ̸= 0 in Proposition 2.4 (3) is necessary as we
saw in Example 2.2.
Remark 2.5. Suppose that C is a tensor category which is graded as an abelian
category by a set S, i.e. C = ⊕s∈S Cs such that there are no non-zero morphisms
between objects in Cs and Cs′ for s ̸= s′ . While an ideal I is in general not an
abelian subcategory, it is closed under retracts, and thus inherits the grading in the
sense that every object X ∈ I can be written as ⊕s∈S Xs with Xs ∈ Is . Let now
I ⊂ C be a non-zero right (or left, or two-sided) ideal. By Proposition 2.4 (1) we
have Proj(C) ⊂ I ⊂ C and hence also Proj(C)s ⊂ Is ⊂ Cs for each s ∈ S. If Cs is
semisimple for some s ∈ S, then Proj(C)s = Cs and hence also Is = Cs .
△
2.3. Modified traces on tensor ideals. Recall that a pivotal structure on a tensor
category is a monoidal natural isomorphism δ : idC ⇒ (−)∨∨ . Equivalently, it is a
monoidal natural isomorphism between the left and the right dual functor.
Let from now on C be pivotal. For simplicity of exposition, we fix a left duality
functor, and take as right dual of an object X the object X ∨ with (co)evaluations
induced by the pivotal structure, meaning that e.g. efvX = evX ∨ ◦(δX ⊗ idX ∨ ). Then
one can define the right (quantum or categorical) trace of an endomorphism f ∈
EndC (X) as the number
f
trr,C
vX ◦(f ⊗ idX ∨ ) ◦ coevX ∈ EndC (1) .
X (f ) = e

One can similarly define the left categorical trace trl,C using the other pair of duality
morphisms. Later we will only deal with ribbon categories, see Remark 2.7, and
both traces then agree. We will thus just write trCX (f ). The (quantum or categorical)
dimension of X ∈ C is dimC (X) = trCX (idX ).

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

13

Lemma 2.6. Let I be a proper right ideal in the pivotal tensor category C. Then the
right categorical trace of C vanishes identically on I, that is trC |I ≡ 0.
Proof. Let X ∈ I. The right trace of an endomorphism f of X is a morphism
trCX (f ) = 1 → X ⊗ X ∨ → 1 .
If this is non-zero, then 1 is a retract of X ⊗ X ∨ . Since X ∈ I and I is a right
ideal, also X ⊗ X ∨ ∈ I. But ideals are closed under retracts, and so 1 ∈ I. Thus I
contains the ideal generated by 1, which is C.
□
If the category is not semisimple, or equivalently if it admits a non-trivial proper
ideal, then to obtain a version of trace and dimension which does not vanish on the
ideal, the notion of a modified trace was introduced and studied in [GPT, GKP1,
GKP2, GPV]. A right modified trace on a right ideal I of C is a family of linear maps
{tX : EndC (X) → k}X∈I
satisfying the following two axioms:
(1) Cyclicity: For every pair of morphisms f, g between objects of I
f

g

g

f

tX (X →
− Y →
− X) = tY (Y →
− X→
− Y) .
(2) right partial trace property: for X ∈ I, V ∈ C, and f ∈ EndC (X ⊗ V )
idX coevV

tXV (f ) = tX X −−−−−→ XV V

∨ f idV ∨

−−−−→ XV V

eV
∨ idX ev

−−−−→ X

!

.

Above, and also in many places below, we have omitted the ⊗-symbol for better
readability.
The right partial trace property is simply the natural compatibility condition between the right modified and categorical traces, and it establishes the ‘multiplicative’
property tXV (f ⊗ g) = trCV (g) tX (f ).
Analogously one defines left modified traces on left ideals, where in (2) one uses
the left partial trace. On two-sided ideals, one can have both left and right modified
traces; a left modified trace on an ideal I does not have to be right, but if it is, we
will simply speak of a two-sided modified trace, or modified trace for short.
Remark 2.7. Adding to Remark 2.3, we call C ribbon, if it is braided and there is a
natural family of isomorphism θX : X → X such that cY,X ◦ cX,Y ◦ (θX ⊗ θY ) = θX⊗Y
and θX ∗ = (θX )∗ . For a ribbon category C, similarly to the left/right categorical
traces, a left modified trace on a (necessarily two-sided) ideal is automatically right,
and vice versa. The proof can easily be adapted from e.g. [GKP1, Thm. 3.3.1]. △
A (left, or right, or two-sided) modified trace t on an ideal I induces canonical
pairings
C(X, V ) × C(V, X) → k,

(f, g) 7→ tX (g ◦ f )

for X ∈ I, V ∈ C ,

and one calls t non-degenerate if all of these pairings are non-degenerate.
Example 2.8.
(1) The categorical trace trC of C serves as a modified trace on
the ideal I = C.

14

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

(2) Any modified trace t on C is a scalar multiple of the categorical trace trC :
from 1 ⊗ X = X, together with cyclicity and the partial trace property, one
finds tX (f ) = t1 (id1 ) trCX (f ).
(3) If C is unimodular, i.e. C(1, P1 ) ∼
= k, then Proj(C) admits a unique (up to
scalar) non-degenerate modified trace [GKP3, Cor. 5.6]. Fix a non-zero ν1 ∈
C(1, P1 ). By non-degeneracy, we must have tP1 (ν1 ◦ p1 ) ̸= 0, and we can
normalise the modified trace so that tP1 (ν1 ◦ p1 ) = 1.
Corollary 2.9. Suppose Proj(C) ̸= 0. Then the categorical trace trC is non-degenerate
iff C is semisimple.
Proof. By Lemma 2.6, trC vanishes on any proper ideal, so if trC is non-degenerate, the
only possible proper ideal of C is (0), and we can conclude from Proposition 2.4 (3)
that C is semisimple. Conversely, if C is semisimple, then it is unimodular and
C = Proj(C). By points (2) and (3) in Example 2.8, there exists a non-degenerate
modified trace on C which is a scalar multiple of trC .
□
Remark 2.10. In addition to Corollary 2.9, we observe that in the non-semisimple
case trC is maximally degenerate in the following sense. Let I be a right ideal in C
and t a right modified trace on I. Define
Ann(I, t) := {X ∈ I | tX (f ) = 0 for all f ∈ EndC (X)} .
Then Ann(I, t) is again a right ideal. Indeed, it is closed under retracts by cyclicity
of t and the partial trace property shows that for X ∈ Ann(I, t) and V ∈ C also
X ⊗ V ∈ Ann(I, t). Since the categorical trace is non-zero on the tensor unit,
Ann(C, trC ) is a proper right ideal, and by Lemma 2.6 every other right ideal is
contained in it. If C is semisimple, we have Ann(C, trC ) = (0) by Corollary 2.9. If C
is not semisimple, we have the inclusions
(0) ⊂ Proj(C) ⊂ I ⊂ Ann(C, trC ) ⊊ C
of right ideals, for any proper and non-zero right ideal I.

△

In [FOG], the following ‘pullback construction’ of tensor ideals and modified traces
is introduced. Recall that for a monoidal functor F : C → D between rigid categories,
there is a canonical natural isomorphism ξX : F (X ∨ ) → (F X)∨ , for an explicit expression see (2.3). If C and D are pivotal, then we say that F is pivotal if we have
commuting diagrams for all X ∈ C:
FX

C
F δX

D
δF
X

F (X ∨∨ )
ξX ∨

(2.2)

(F X)∨∨ (ξ )∨ (F (X ∨ ))∨
X

The next statement is a special case of the construction in [FOG, Prop. 2.6 & 2.7]
for submodule categories and module traces.
Proposition 2.11. Let F : C → D be a monoidal functor between two tensor categories, and let I be a right ideal of D.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

15

(1) The pullback F ∗ I of I along F — i.e. the full subcategory consisting of X ∈ C
such that F (X) ∈ I — is a right ideal of C.
(2) Let the categories in addition be pivotal, and suppose that F is pivotal. If t
is a right modified trace on I, then the pullback F ∗ t of t along F — i.e. the
family of linear maps defined by


F ∗t





X

(f ) = tF X F f



∗

for X ∈ F I — is a right modified trace on F ∗ I.
Proof. Since F : C → D is a monoidal functor, A ⃝
< X = A ⊗ F X for X ∈ C, A ∈ D,
defines a right C-module structure on D, and F is a right C-module functor with
respect to ⃝
< . Note that the associators and unitors of ⃝
< are induced by the
multiplication and unit isomorphisms of F . A right ideal I ≤ D, being closed under
tensor products from the right, is a right submodule category which is also closed
under retracts, and so [FOG, Prop. 2.6] implies that F ∗ I is a right ideal.
Now let t be a right modified trace on I ≤ D, and let F preserve pivotal structures.
We claim that these conditions guarantee that t is a C-module trace on the C-module
endocategory (I, id) in the sense of [FOG, Def. 2.4]. To see this, note first that the
canonical natural isomorphism ξX : F (X ∨ ) → (F X)∨ is given by the composition
F2 (X ∨ ,X)⊗id

id ⊗ coev

X
F (X ∨ ) ⊗ F X ⊗ (F X)∨ −−−−−−−−→ F (X ∨ ⊗ X) ⊗ (F X)∨
F (X ∨ ) −−−−−−F−→

F (evX )⊗id

F −1 ⊗id

0
−−−−−−→ F 1 ⊗ (F X)∨ −−
−−→ (F X)∨ ,

(2.3)

where F2 and F0 are, respectively, the multiplication and the unit isomorphisms of the
−1
into the right partial trace condition
monoidal functor F . Then one inserts ξX ◦ ξX
satisfied by t for any endomorphism of A ⃝
< X, and uses the commutativity of the
diagram (2.2) to conclude that t is a module trace. Thus the claim about pullback
modified traces follows from the more general construction in [FOG, Prop. 2.7]. □
Similar statements hold of course for all variations, e.g. the pullback of a left
modified trace on a left ideal. Note also that for C ribbon, the pullback of any modified
trace is automatically two-sided. Proposition 2.11 will be our source of non-trivial
intermediate ideals with modified trace. Namely, we consider F ∗ I ⊂ C for F : C → D
pivotal, D an appropriate unimodular tensor category, and I the projective ideal in D,
see Section 2.4 for the application to link invariants and Section 4.4 for details in the
case of quasi-Hopf algebras.
Remark 2.12. First paragraph of the proof of Proposition 2.11 suggests a more
general source of tensor ideals in C. Consider a C-module functor F : C → M, for M
< exact in the second variable,
a right C-module category with the action functor ⃝
and C is considered as the right regular C-module. Such C-module functors are
< X.
parametrised by objects M ∈ M, i.e. F can be written in the form FM : X 7→ M ⃝
Assume furthermore, I is a C-submodule category of M closed under retracts. One
example of such a C-submodule is Proj(M), due to rigidity of C and the assumption
∗
on ⃝
< . Then, FM
I is a right C-submodule of the regular module category C, by
[FOG, Prop. 2.6], which is the same as right tensor ideal in C, and this is a two-sided

16

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

∗
ideal for braided C. By [FOG, Prop. 2.7], a modified trace on FM
I can again be
obtained by pulling back a module trace on I ⊂ M.
△

2.4. Invariants of C-coloured ribbon graphs and links. Let now C in addition
be ribbon, and let us denote by RibC the rigid ribbon category of ribbon graphs
embedded in R2 × [0, 1]. Recall that a ribbon graph consists of oriented framed
strands coloured by objects of C and of rectangles called coupons where strands can
end, coloured by morphisms in C. More precisely, RibC has (see [Tu, Ch. I.2] for full
details)
• objects: Finite tuples (V , ε) = ((V1 , ε1 ), . . . , (Vm , εm )) with Vk ∈ C and εk ∈
{+, −}. We denote by |V | = m the length of the tuple.
• morphisms: Each (V , ε) ∈ RibC determines in a natural way a set of Ccoloured framed oriented points in R2 , say, along the x-axis. A morphism
T : (V , ε) → (V ′ , ε′ ) is then an isotopy class5 of C-coloured ribbon graphs in
R2 × [0, 1] from (V , ε) × {0} to (V ′ , ε′ ) × {1} such that framings, orientations,
and labels match — e.g. an incoming boundary vertex (V, +) means that the
corresponding strand is coloured with V and oriented upward.
The tensor product acts on objects by concatenation of lists, and the tensor unit of
RibC is the empty tuple ∅.
We will draw morphisms in RibC as blue C-coloured ribbon graphs so as not to
confuse them with string diagrams in C, for which we use black.
The Reshetikhin-Turaev functor FC : RibC → C is a ribbon functor which acts on
objects as
FC (V , ε) =

|V |
O

Viεi

where V + = V and V − = V ∨

(2.4)

i=1

and on morphisms via evaluation of the corresponding string diagram, see [RT]
and [Tu, Ch. I].
Fix now an ideal I in C and a modified trace t on I. A morphism in RibC is closed
if it is an endomorphism of the tensor unit ∅ of RibC , and a closed C-coloured ribbon
graph T is I-admissible if it has at least one edge coloured by an object in I. If the
ideal I is clear from the context, we will sometimes just say admissible. Given an
I-admissible graph T with an edge coloured by X ∈ I, a cutting presentation of T
is a C-coloured ribbon graph TX ∈ RibC ((X, +), (X, +)) such that
C
T = trRib
(X,+) (TX ) .

Note that cutting presentations are not necessarily unique. Nevertheless, the properties of modified traces allow for the following:
Theorem 2.13. Let T be an I-admissible C-coloured ribbon graph. Then the number




FC,′ t (T ) := tX FC (TX )

for some cutting presentation TX of T

5The isotopy can move the ribbon graph freely in the interior R2 × (0, 1), but keeps boundary

points and framings fixed. E.g. coupons can be rotated and translated arbitrarily, dragging the
attached ribbons along accordingly.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

17

is well-defined, i.e. an invariant of the isotopy class of T .
This is shown in [GPT, GPV], see also [DGGPR1, Thm. 3.3] for a proof in the
present setting (in [DGGPR1] finiteness is assumed, but the proof does not use it).
As in [DGGPR1] we call FC,′ t the renormalised invariant of I-admissible C-coloured
ribbon graphs. If I = C and t = trC , then FC,′ trC = FC , i.e. the renormalised invariant
based on the categorical trace is just the standard Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant of
closed C-coloured ribbon graphs.
Let LM
X denote a closed C-coloured ribbon graph containing a component which is
a knot with colour M ∈ C. By this we mean that this component is an embedded
ribbon loop which does not touch any coupons, but which is allowed to link with the
rest of the ribbon graph. Furthermore, LM
X contains an edge (distinct from the knot)
coloured by X ∈ I.
Proposition 2.14. For any exact sequence 0 → A → B → C → 0 in C we have
′
A
′
C
FC,′ t (LB
X ) = FC, t (LX ) + FC, t (LX ) .

Before proving this, let us state an obvious consequence: intuitively, it tells us
that given an admissible graph, any component that ‘looks like a loop’ need only be
coloured by simple objects, as long as we keep one edge coloured by something from
the ideal on which our modified trace acts. More precisely, we have the following
corollary.
Corollary 2.15. The renormalised Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant of LB
X depends only
on the class of B in the Grothendieck ring Gr(C) of C, that is
FC,′ t (LB
X) =

X

[B : U ] · FC,′ t (LUX ) .

U ∈Irr(C)

Proof of Proposition 2.14. In RibC we can without loss of generality represent LB
X as
LB
X =

eB
L
X

X,

B
and cutting off the top cap and the bottom left cup, we obtain a morphism



η(X)B = FC 




eB
L

X



 ∈ C(B ∨ ⊗ B, X ⊗ X ∨ )



after evaluating with the Reshetikhin-Turaev functor. By our requirement on the
B-coloured edge to be part of a knot, this actually defines a dinatural transformation
η(X) ∈ Dinat(−∨ ⊗ −, X ⊗ X ∨ ). If 0 → A → B → C → 0 is any short exact
sequence, by [GR3, Lem. 2.1] we have
g B = η(X)A ◦ coev
g A +η(X)C ◦ coev
g C .
η(X)B ◦ coev

18

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

ϑXn

ϑbU

cm
X,X

ϑaX

X U
(c) S(X, a; U, b)

(b) T (m, X)

(a) O(n, X)

Figure 1. The three types of links used in the computation of example
invariants. Here, X ∈ I, U ∈ C, n, a, b ∈ Z, m ∈ 2Z + 1.
From monoidality of FC and linearity of the modified trace we therefore get
!!

t X FC

eB
L
X

!!

= tX FC

eA
L
X

!!

+ t X FC

as claimed.

eC
L
X

,
□

Remark 2.16.
(1) Proposition 2.14 and its Corollary 2.15 also hold for more
general types of C-coloured graphs. Indeed, looking at the proof, we see that
it is enough to require the M -coloured edge of LM
X to be part of a natural
transformation, i.e. natural in M .
(2) The invariant FC,′ t (T ) for an I-admissible ribbon graph T does not change if
we add a 1-coloured loop O1 to T : FC,′ t (T ) = FC,′ t (T ⊔O1 ). For the ideal I = C
every object is admissible, in particular the tensor unit 1. For a C-coloured
link L we can write
FC (L) = FC,′ trC (L) = FC,′ trC (L ⊔ O1 )
and apply Corollary 2.15 with X = 1. This shows that the ReshetikhinTuraev invariant FC depends on the objects colouring L only up to their class
in the Grothendieck ring.
△
2.5. Examples of link invariants for symplectic fermions. We will now give
some examples of renormalised Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants.
We consider the following families of C-coloured links, where X, U ∈ C (see Figure 1):
• O(n, X), n ∈ Z: the unknot with framing number n.
• T (m, X), m ∈ 2Z + 1: the (2, m)-torus knot. This is the braid closure, i.e.
the categorical trace in RibC , of cm
X,X .
• S(X, a; U, b), a, b ∈ Z: the Hopf link of X with U with framing a and b,
respectively, i.e. the braid closure of (ϑXa ⊗ ϑUb ) ◦ cU,X ◦ cX,U in RibC .

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

19

Note that O(±1, X) is isotopic to T (±1, X), and that T (3, X) is the X-coloured
trefoil. Replacing + with − in O(±n, X) or T (±m, X) turns each knot into its mirror
image. By an appropriate rotation one sees that S(X, a; U, b) and S(U, b; X, a) are
isotopic.
For each link L in the list above, we compute the invariant FC,′ t (L), where we
vary the input category C, the tensor ideal I with modified trace t, and the colours
X, U of the link components. The object X will always be in I, while on U no such
restriction is imposed. However, by Corollary 2.15 it is sufficient to restrict oneself
to simple U . We have the relations
FC,′ t (O(±1, X)) = FC,′ t (T (±1, X)) ,
FC,′ t (S(X, a; U, b)) = FC,′ t (S(U, b; X, a)) ,
FC,′ t (O(1, X ⊗ U )) = FC,′ t (S(X, 1; U, 1)) ,

(2.5)

where the last line follows from (ϑX ⊗ ϑU ) ◦ cU,X ◦ cX,U = ϑX⊗U .
Let us consider the ingredients C, I, t and X in turn.
The ribbon category C: We take C to be the category Q M of finite-dimensional left
modules over Q = Q(N, β), the (finite-dimensional) symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf
algebras from [FGR2]. In particular, Q M is a finite tensor category. The parameters
N ∈ Z>0 and β ∈ C are subject to β 4 = (−1)N . We review the definition of Q(N, β)
in detail in Section 5.
The value of β affects the ribbon quasi-Hopf structure of Q, but not the algebra
structure. Independently of N , the algebra Q(N, β) has precisely four simple modules,
denoted X0± and X1± . The simple objects X1± are projective, but X0± are not. The
length of the composition series of the projective covers P0± of X0± is 22N , so in
particular it grows with N . The category Q M is unimodular, i.e. the tensor unit X0+
is also the socle of P0+ .
The tensor ideal I and the modified trace t: We consider three different choices of
tensor ideal in C = Q M:
(1) Q M with the categorical trace trC .
(2) Proj(Q M) with the unique-up-to-scalar non-degenerate modified trace t from
Example 2.8 (3).
(3) A -Proj(H M) with pullback modified trace Res∗ (tA ), where we take
H := Q(2, β)
and A ⊂ H is a pivotal unimodular quasi-Hopf subalgebra.
In point (3), the intermediate ideal I = A -Proj(H M) is the pullback ideal (as in
Proposition 2.11) of Proj(A M) along the restriction functor Res and Res∗ (tA ) is the
pullback of the unique-up-to-scalar modified trace on Proj(A M). The full details can
be found in Section 5.3.
For N = 2 the three ideals are properly contained in each other:
Proj(H M) ⊊ A -Proj(H M) ⊊ H M .
Corresponding examples exist for any N ≥ 2, see Section 5.3.1.

(2.6)

20

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

The colouring objects: Depending on the tensor ideal in question, the colouring objects are as follows:
(1) Q M: By Remark 2.16 (2), colouring link components by Irr(Q M) is sufficient
for knowing the invariants for arbitrary colours in Q M. Hence in this case we
restrict ourselves to the four simple objects X0± , X1± of Q M.
(2) Proj(Q M): We know the invariants for P ∈ Proj(Q M) once we know the
invariants for all projective indecomposables, i.e. for the projective covers of
simple objects.
(3) A -Proj(H M): We will consider a family of objects Pµ ∈ A -Proj(H M) indexed
by µ ∈ Mat2 (C). The modules Pµ and Pµ′ always have the same class in the
Grothendieck ring of Q M, but are isomorphic only if µ = µ′ , see Section 5.3
for their construction and structure.
The link invariants obtained from these input data are listed in Table 1. The
explicit computations of these invariants can be found in Section 6. Let us collect
some observations about the results in that table. We order the discussion by column,
i.e. by the choice of tensor ideal.
(1) Q M: The simple objects X0± generate a copy of the category of super-vector
spaces in Q M. Since that category is symmetric, the invariant can only detect
the parity of X0± , but none of the topology of the link. By Lemma 2.6, any
invariant involving a ribbon coloured by the simple objects X1± is zero, as
these are projective.
(2) Proj(Q M): Consider the results for a fixed choice of the ribbon category, i.e.
for fixed N and β. If N is odd, we see that for fixed choice of colour P0± ,
the invariant FC,′ t can distinguish all the framed unknots O(n, X) and all the
torus knots T (m, X). By contrast, for a semisimple ribbon category, these
invariants would always be periodic6 in n and m.
For even N and β = ±1, FC,′ t can not distinguish the framed unknot from
its mirror knot, and ditto for the torus knots.
(3) A -Proj(H M): This is the most interesting case. First note that here N = 2
and we just saw that for the choice β = ±1, the projective ideal could not tell
apart a knot and its mirror for unknots and torus knots. For the intermediate
ideal, these can now be distinguished even for β = ±1.
More remarkably, for the intermediate ideal the modified trace can distinguish a continuum of representations in A -Proj(H M). For example, FC,′ Res∗ (tA )
can detect the value λ ∈ C for the choice µ = ( λ0 10 ).
On the other hand, this example is somewhat special in the sense that link
invariants reduce to the knot invariant of the component labelled by Pµ times
the quantum dimensions of the other labels due to a degeneracy explained in
Remark 6.1.
6This follows from the fact that in a (finitely) semisimple ribbon category, for each object X, the

twist θX has finite order (and hence also the double braiding has finite order), see [BK, Thm. 3.1.19]
– that theorem assumes modularity, but the part of the proof concerning the order of the twist does
not use that assumption. Alternatively, one can specialise the statement for finite braided tensor
categories in [Et] to the semisimple case.

Table 1. Some link invariants based on the categories of modules over the symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf
algebras. The blue expressions have been interpolated from Mathematica-output for several values
of N and m. We require a, b, n ∈ Z and m ∈ 2Z + 1.
ideal I in C ,
modified trace t

X : FC,′ t (T (m, X))

Proj(Q M), t

X0ε : ε

P0ε : 2ε nN β −2

X1ε : 0

X1ε : 2−N −1 εn+1 β −n

X0ε : ε

P0ε : 2ε mN β −2

X1ε : 0

X1ε : 2−N −1 mN β m−2
(P0ν , X0ρ ): 12 νρ aN β −2

(X, U ) : FC,′ t (S(X, a; U, b))
(Xiν , Xjρ ): δi,0 δj,0 νρ

(X1ν , X0ρ ): ν2−N −1 (νβ −1 )a
(P0ν , X1ρ ): ρ2N −1 (ρβ −1 )b
(X1ν , X1ρ ): 12 (νβ −1 )a (ρβ −1 )b

A -Proj(H M), Res∗ (tA )
(for N = 2)
Pµ : 2n(1 + det µ)
Pµ : 2m(1 + det µ)
(Pµ , X0± ): ±2a(1 + det µ)
(Pµ , X1± ): 0

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

X: FC,′ t (O(n, X))

C
Q M, tr

21

22

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

The ideal A -Proj(H M) also contains modules which are H-projective, but
it turns out that if we label any component of a link with such a module, the
invariant is zero by Corollary 5.11, in contrast to when we start from the ideal
Proj(Q M) as in point (2).
There are a number of simple consistency checks for the expressions given in Table 1:
• The identities listed in (2.5) are satisfied. For the last identity in (2.5) on needs
νρ
to know the tensor products. For example X1ν ⊗ X1ρ ∼
= P0 , see Section 5.2.1.
• In the middle column for the framed Hopf link, when both labels are projective, one can choose which one to cut and evaluate the modified trace on.
Combining this with Corollary 2.15 and the identity [P0ν ] = 22N −1 ([X0+ ] +
[X0− ]) in the Grothendieck ring (see Section 5.2.1) gives
FC,′ t (S(P0ν , a; X1ρ , b))
= 22N −1 FC,′ t (S(X1ρ , b; X0+ , a)) + 22N −1 FC,′ t (S(X1ρ , b; X0− , a)) ,
which is indeed the case in Table 1.
Remark 2.17. Assume that we have a family Xλ of mutually non-isomorphic objects
in C parametrised by λ ∈ C, such that the Grothendieck classes [Xλ ] are independent
of λ. Let Lλ be a link with one component coloured by Xλ and all other components
(if there are any) coloured in an arbitrary but fixed way. Then:
• I = C: By Remark 2.16 (2) the invariant FC,′ trC (Lλ ) depends on the colouring
only through the class in the Grothendieck ring, and is therefore independent
of λ.
• I = Proj(C): We first note that the Xλ cannot all be projective. Indeed, there
are only finitely many distinct indecomposable projective objects with composition factors determined by summands in the fixed Grothendieck class [Xλ ]
(by local finiteness of C and Fitting’s Lemma, an indecomposable projective is
uniquely determined by its head). Thus, for FC,′ t (Lλ ) to be I-admissible, Lλ
must have at least two components, one of which is coloured by Xλ , and one by
a projective object. But then by Corollary 2.15 again only the Grothendieck
class of Xλ is relevant and so FC,′ t (Lλ ) is independent of λ.
Thus in order to have a chance to see the parameter λ, we need the Xλ to all be in an
ideal I with Proj(C) ⊊ I ⊊ C. Case (3) above illustrates that then it can indeed be
possible to distinguish such a continuum of objects with fixed Grothendieck class. △
3. Invariants of closed 3-manifolds
In this section we review the construction of invariants of closed connected oriented
3-manifolds with so-called bichrome graphs inside of them [DGP, DGGPR1], and
provide the results of an example computation for lens spaces. In contrast to the
previous section, here we need to work with finite tensor categories. More specifically,
the construction takes as input datum a twist non-degenerate and unimodular finite
ribbon category.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

23

3.1. Twist non-degeneracy, unimodularity, and factorisability. Recall the
definition of ends and coends from e.g. [ML, Ch. IX]. In a finite tensor category
C, the coend
L=

Z X∈C

X∨ ⊗ X

with dinatural transformation jX : X ∨ ⊗ X → L

exists (see [KL, Cor. 5.1.8]
and [Sh1, Thm. 3.6]), and is a coalgebra in C [KL, Sec. 5.2].
R
Similarly, the end E = X∈C X ⊗ X ∨ exists and is an algebra; denote its universal
dinatural transformation by j E : E → X ⊗ X ∨ . If C is braided, then both L and E
can be given the structure of a Hopf algebra, but we will only use the structure maps
of L:
mult.:
mL : L ⊗ L → L
comult.: ∆L : L → L ⊗ L

unit:
ηL : 1 → L
counit: εL : L → 1 .

The dual L∨ carries the natural structure of the dual Hopf algebra, and is in fact
isomorphic to E as a Hopf algebra. There is also a Hopf pairing
ωL : L ⊗ L → 1 ,

(3.1)

which means that the morphism L → L∨ built using ωL is a morphism of Hopf
algebras. See [FGR1, Sec. 3] for a detailed review using the present conventions.
A finite tensor category is called unimodular if the projective cover P1 of the tensor
unit is self-dual, or equivalently if the Hom-space 1 → P1 is one-dimensional (rather
than zero-dimensional).
Let C be a unimodular braided finite tensor category. Then L admits a twosided integral and a two-sided cointegral with trivial object of integrals, see e.g. [KL,
Sec. 4.2.3] for Hopf algebra (co)integrals in general braided categories. This means
there is a unique (up to scalar) non-zero morphism Λ ∈ C(1, L) satisfying
mL ◦ (Λ ⊗ idL ) = Λ ◦ εL = mL ◦ (idL ⊗Λ) ,
see [BGR2, Rem. 6.2] for a proof using monadic cointegrals. Dually, the cointegral
Λco ∈ C(L, 1) is determined up to scalar by
(Λco ⊗ idL ) ◦ ∆L = ηL ◦ Λco = (idL ⊗Λco ) ◦ ∆L ,

(3.2)

see [Sh4, Cor. 4.10].7 We can and will normalise Λco such that [BKLT, Thm. 3.3]
Λco ◦ Λ = id1 .

(3.3)

Define the morphism Q : L ⊗ L → L ⊗ L via the dinatural transformation
idX ∨ ⊗(cY ∨ ,X ◦cX,Y ∨ )⊗idY

j ⊗j

X
Y
X ∨ X Y ∨ Y −−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−→ X ∨ X Y ∨ Y −−
−−→
L⊗L .

(3.4)

In terms of Q, the Hopf pairing is given by ωL = (εL ⊗ εL ) ◦ Q. We define the
morphism SL : L → L as
SL = (εL ⊗ idL ) ◦ Q ◦ (idL ⊗Λ) .

(3.5)

7We note that this reference uses the notion dual to L, namely the end instead of the coend, and

the defining equations on categorical integrals [Sh4, Eqs. (4.4) & (4.5)] in the unimodular case are
equivalent to (3.2).

24

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

Remark 3.1. If SL is invertible, the unimodular braided finite tensor category C is
called factorisable. Equivalently, C is factorisable iff ωL in (3.1) is non-degenerate,
i.e. if the induced morphism of Hopf algebras is an isomorphism L ∼
= E. To see that
these two conditions are indeed equivalent, one can use the identity SL = (ωL ⊗
id) ◦ (id ⊗∆L ) ◦ (id ⊗Λ), which is immediate from the definitions, together with nondegeneracy of the copairing ∆L ◦ Λ (see e.g. [KL, Cor. 4.2.13] for the latter).
△
Now let C in addition be ribbon with ribbon twist ϑ. Let TL be the unique endomorphism of L such that
TL ◦ jX = jX ◦ (idX ∨ ⊗ϑX )

(3.6)

for all X ∈ C. TL is invertible, and it determines the stabilisation coefficients ∆± ∈ k
of C via
εL ◦ TL±1 ◦ Λ = ∆± · id1 .

(3.7)

We call C twist non-degenerate if the numbers ∆± are non-zero.
By postcomposition with SL , TL we obtain linear endomorphisms of C(1, L), which
will be useful to express the lens space invariants in Section 3.4. For the explicit quasiHopf algebra computations it will be easier to have linear endomorphisms of End(idC )
instead. To relate the two, recall from e.g. [GR3, Sec. 2] that for a unimodular finite
tensor category C, the linear maps
ψ

ρ

End(idC ) −
→ C(L, 1) →
− C(1, L) ,
given by
ψ(κ) ◦ jX = evX ◦(idX ∨ ⊗κX ) and ρ(g) = (g ⊗ idL ) ◦ ∆L ◦ Λ

(3.8)

are isomorphisms. By pullback of SL ◦ (−), TL ◦ (−) along ρ ◦ ψ we get linear
endomorphisms of End(idC ), which we denote by SC , TC . Explicitly, for α ∈ End(idC ),
ρ(ψ(SC (α))) = SL ◦ ρ(ψ(α)) ,

(3.9)

and similar for TC .
A modular tensor category is a factorisable ribbon finite tensor category. According
to [DGGPR1, Lem. 2.7], a unimodular ribbon finite tensor category C is modular if
and only if there exists a non-zero number ζ ∈ k × such that the integral and cointegral
of L are related via the Hopf pairing ωL as
ωL ◦ (Λ ⊗ idL ) = ζ · Λco .

(3.10)

The number ζ is called the modularity parameter. It is further shown in [DGGPR1,
Cor. 4.6] that ζ = ∆− ∆+ holds in a modular tensor category. Conversely, by [DGGPR1,
Prop. 2.6] a modular tensor category is automatically unimodular and twist nondegenerate.
Remark 3.2. Let C be a modular tensor category.
(1) One can constrain the normalisation freedom for Λ by imposing
ωL ◦ (Λ ⊗ Λ) = id1 .

(3.11)

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

25

This fixes Λ up to a sign, and together with Λco ◦ Λ = id1 implies ζ = 1. Note,
however, that this is not the usual normalisation used for modular fusion
categories as in [BK, Tu], c.f. [GR2, Rem. 3.10].
(2) Recall from e.g. [Lyu, FGR1] that the modular group SL(2, Z) acts projectively on C(1, L), the S- and T -generators acting by composition with SL
and TL as given in (3.5) and (3.6). Correspondingly, SC and TC provide a
projective SL(2, Z)-action on End(idC ).
g V in
(3) For any V ∈ C, the internal character is the morphism χV = jV ◦ coev
−1
C(1, L) [FS, Sh2], and we denote by ϕV = (ρ ◦ ψ) (χV ) the natural transformation corresponding to χV under the isomorphism (3.8). For example,
χ1 = ηL is by definition the unit of the Hopf algebra L, and using the normalisation (3.3) one finds ρ(Λco ) = ηL . Thus ϕ1 = ψ −1 (Λco ).
As shown in e.g. [GR3, FGR1], the S-transformation SC acting on ϕV yields
the natural transformation

SC (ϕV )X =

(3.12)

V,

X
which is also called the open Hopf link operator [CG].
(4) By [GR3, Thm. 6.1], the non-degenerate modified trace on Proj(C) can be
chosen such that tP1 ((ϕ1 )P1 ) = 1. We remark that (ϕ1 )P1 factors through 1,
see [GR3, Prop. 6.5].
△
3.2. Bichrome graphs and their invariants. We now recall the category of partially C-coloured bichrome ribbon graphs from [DGP, DGGPR1]. This is the category
BiRibC whose objects are the same as those of RibC , see Section 2.4, but morphisms
are now isotopy classes of bichrome graphs. These are ribbon graphs which have
• two types of edges: blue edges labelled by objects in C; and red edges which
carry no label
• two types of coupons: blue coupons coloured by morphisms in C, such that all
incident edges are blue and the labels of coupons and edges are compatible;
bichrome coupons, which are unlabelled and only come in the two types
L
and

.

E
It is clear that RibC is a subcategory of BiRibC : it has the same objects, and its
morphisms are precisely the bichrome graphs which are purely blue. Moreover, there
exists an extension FΛ : BiRibC → C of the Reshetikhin-Turaev functor FC , called

26

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

the Lyubashenko-Reshetikhin-Turaev functor in [DGP, DGGPR1]. The subscript Λ
signifies that the integral is used in the definition of FΛ : what the functor does is,
essentially, to colour the red parts of the graph by Λ. We will now describe this
functor algorithmically and in an example, more details and proofs of the properties
stated can all be found in [DGGPR1, Sec. 3.1].
On objects, FΛ agrees with FC as given in (2.4). For its action on morphisms,
consider as an example the bichrome graph
L
T =

E
A cycle of T is a (maximal) subset of red edges in T that belong to the same component in the red graph obtained by replacing the bichrome coupons by cups and caps,
as appropriate, and throwing away the blue parts. Let n be the number of cycles
in T , and let s and t be the source and target object of FΛ (T ), respectively. In our
running example: n = 2, s = E, t = L. The morphism FΛ (T ) ∈ C(s, t) is obtained
using the following recipe.
Step 1. For each cycle c of T , pick an edge, then ‘bend’ it down and ‘cut’ it open so
that the result is a so-called n-bottom graph Te . In our example one obtains
a 2-bottom graph:
L

T ⇝ Te =
E

The new graph Te has the property that when closing the cut red edges again
with cups, one recovers the original graph T .
Step 2. Change the colour of the red part of Te to blue, replacing a bichrome coupon
by the appropriate universal dinatural transformation j or j E . The formerly
red part then gives rise to a transformation ηTe which is dinatural in each of

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

27

the n pairs of consecutive red strands. Namely (ηTe)X,Y = FC (TeX,Y ), where
L
jY
TeX,Y =

jYE

for all X, Y ∈ C.

X ∨ X Y ∨Y
E
Step 3. Use the universal property and the Fubini theorem for coends to obtain from
ηTe a morphism fTe ∈ C(L⊗n ⊗ s, t):

jX

L

L

fTe

jY

jY

:=

jYE

E
E
Step 4. Finally, define FΛ (T ) by inserting n copies of the integral,
FΛ (T ) := fTe ◦ (Λ⊗n ⊗ ids ) : s → t .
In [DGGPR1, Prop. 3.1] it is shown that this is a well-defined construction which
yields a ribbon functor.
Fix now an ideal I in C and a modified trace t on I. It is straightforward to
generalise the notions of closed and admissible C-coloured ribbon graphs to bichrome
graphs, and the concept of a (non-unique) cutting presentation of an admissible bichrome graph also easily translates. This leads to what is called the renormalised
invariant of admissible closed bichrome graphs in [DGGPR1]:
Theorem 3.3 ([DGGPR1, Thm. 3.3]). Let T be an I-admissible closed bichrome
graph. Then the number




′
FΛ,
t (T ) := tX FΛ (TX )

for some cutting presentation TX of T

is well-defined, and in particular an invariant of the isotopy class of T .
Remark 3.4. The proofs of [DGGPR1, Prop 3.1, Thm 3.3] do not rely on Λ being
an integral for L, and so one could have likewise defined invariants (of bichrome
graphs) using any morphism in C(1, L). However, morphisms that lead to welldefined manifold invariants have to satisfy extra conditions arising from the Kirby
moves. The integral Λ satisfies these conditions, and more general such morphisms
were investigated in [Vi] under the name Kirby elements.
△

28

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

′
The invariants FΛ and FΛ,
t are both defined on purely blue closed admissible
bichrome graphs, but they are in general different. To see this, let I = Proj(C) and
let t be the unique non-degenerate modified trace on Proj(C) from Example 2.8 (3),
′
with normalisation tP1 (ν1 ◦p1 ) = 1.8 Then, unless C is semisimple, FΛ,
t (T ) is different
from FΛ (T ): the bichrome graph T given by the trace (in BiRibC ) of ν1 ◦ p1 satisfies
′
FΛ,
t (T ) = tP1 (ν1 ◦ p1 ) = 1 and FΛ (T ) = p1 ◦ ν1 = 0.
More generally, we record the following lemma for later use, which is a direct
consequence of Lemma 2.6:

Lemma 3.5. Let T be a closed bichrome graph containing an edge coloured by an
object in a proper tensor ideal. Then FΛ (T ) = 0.
3.3. Definition and properties of the manifold invariant. Throughout, all
manifolds will be oriented. Let C be twist non-degenerate and unimodular. In order
to define invariants of 3-manifolds with embedded C-coloured bichrome graphs, we
first recall some notation following [DGGPR1]. For a framed link L in the 3-sphere
S 3 we denote the manifold resulting from surgery on L by ML . The number of components of the link is ℓ(L), and its signature is σ(L). Let M be a closed connected
3-manifold, containing a closed bichrome graph T . If M ∼
= ML , then we say that L is
a surgery link for M ; we denote by T ⊂ ML also the pullback of T along the homeomorphism, and by L ∪ T ⊂ S 3 the corresponding bichrome graph in S 3 , regarding L
as red.
Since C is twist non-degenerate, we can choose invertible numbers D, δ ∈ k with,
recall the definition of ∆± in (3.7),
D
∆+
D 2 = ∆− ∆+ and δ =
=
.
∆−
D
Theorem 3.6 ([DGGPR1, Thm. 3.8]). Let C be a unimodular and twist non-degenerate
finite ribbon tensor category, and let I be an ideal of C with modified trace t. If
M ∼
= ML is a closed connected 3-manifold containing an I-admissible bichrome ribbon graph T , then
′
L′Λ, t (M, T ) = D −1−ℓ(L) δ −σ(L) FΛ,
t (L ∪ T )

(3.13)

is a topological invariant of the pair (M, T ).
Following [DGGPR1] call L′Λ, t the renormalised Lyubashenko invariant of admissible closed 3-manifolds.
Remark 3.7.
(1) For H a ribbon Hopf algebra, C = H M the category of finitedimensional left H-modules, and I the projective ideal in H M, the invariant
L′Λ, t (M, T ) was first considered in [DGP], see [DGGPR2, Sec. 2.4] for the
equivalence between [DGGPR1] and [DGP] in the Hopf algebra case.
(2) The notation L′Λ, t is chosen because of the dependence of the invariant on both
Λ and t. In fact, it also implicitly depends on a choice of sign for D. For if
we change Λ → Λ′ = xΛ for some x ∈ k × , then ∆′± = x∆± , and consequently
8In case C is in addition modular, one can choose ν

1 to satisfy (ϕ1 )P1 = ν1 ◦ p1 [GR3, Prop. 6.5],
and the normalisation of the modified trace then agrees with the one given in Remark 3.2 (4).

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

29

D ′ = ±xD. If we impose the condition D ′ = xD, i.e. Λ′ /D ′ = Λ/D, then
δ ′ = δ and we have
1
L′xΛ,yt+zt′ = (y L′Λ,t + z L′Λ,t′ )
x
for all x, y, z ∈ C and modified traces t and t′ .
△
The statement of Corollary 2.15 generalises to the renormalised Lyubashenko invariant, and for later reference let us restate it here in full:
Corollary 3.8. Suppose the bichrome graph TXB in M has an edge labelled by X ∈ I
and a disjointly embedded knot coloured with B ∈ C (which may link non-trivially
with the remaining part of the graph TXB ). Then
L′Λ, t (M, TXB ) =

X

[B : U ] · L′Λ, t (M, TXU ) .

U ∈Irr(C)

Lyubashenko’s original invariant [Lyu]—or rather its extension allowing for Ccoloured ribbon graphs inside the 3-manifolds—is the following special case.
Definition 3.9 (Lyubashenko invariant). Let everything be as in Theorem 3.6, but
specialise to the ideal I = C. By Example 2.8 (2), without loss of generality the
modified trace is the categorical trace trC . We call
LyuΛ (M, T ) = L′Λ, trC (M, T )
the Lyubashenko invariant of the pair (M, T ).
In case C is semisimple, it is immediate from [DGGPR1, Sec. 2.9] that LyuΛ
coincides with the Reshetikhin-Turaev invariant as presented for example in [BK,
Thm. 4.1.12]. For C not semisimple, Lemma 3.5 implies that LyuΛ (M, T ) vanishes
whenever T has an edge coloured by an object in a proper ideal. From Corollary 3.8
we see that if T is a link (i.e. there are no coupons), LyuΛ (M, T ) factors through
Gr(C) with respect to all components of T simultaneously.
The invariants from Theorem 3.6 are related to the Lyubashenko invariant as in the
following proposition, which is an immediate consequence of [DGGPR1, Prop. 3.11].9
Proposition 3.10. Let M be a closed connected 3-manifold containing a bichrome
graph T = Te ⊔ Tadm where Tadm is admissible and contained within an open ball in
M not intersecting Te . Then
L′Λ, t (M, T ) = D LyuΛ (M, Te ) L′Λ, t (S 3 , Tadm ) .
′
′
3
−1
In particular, if FΛ,
, we have
t (Tadm ) = 1, and so by (3.13) LΛ, t (S , Tadm ) = D

LyuΛ (M, Te ) = L′Λ, t (M, Te ⊔ Tadm ) .
9There is a typo in [DGGPR1, Prop. 3.11]: the right hand side should have an extra factor of D,

i.e. the identity should read, in the present notation, L′Λ, t (M #M ′ , T ′ ) = D LyuΛ (M ) L′Λ, t (M ′ , T ′ ).
Also, [DGGPR1, Prop. 3.11] assumes that there is no ribbon graph in M , but the same proof works
in the present situation where M contains T .

30

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

Combining Proposition 3.10 with Lemma 3.5 gives:
Corollary 3.11. Suppose the bichrome graph T inside the 3-manifold M can be
written as T1 ⊔ T2 , where T1 contains an edge coloured by an object in any proper
tensor ideal, and T2 is admissible and contained within an open ball in M that does
not intersect T1 . Then L′Λ, t (M, T ) = 0.
As another corollary to the above proposition, consider a situation where the ribbon
graph T in M can be written as T = T ′ ∪ T ′′ , such that T ′ is disjoint from T ′′ but not
necessarily contained in a 3-ball disjoint from T ′′ . Assume that T ′ is an embedded
blue loop labelled by X ∈ I with one coupon f : X → X which factors through 1.
Corollary 3.12. We have L′Λ, t (M, T ) = tX (f ) LyuΛ (M, T ′′ ).
Proof. As f factors through 1, we can replace f by two coupons, one from X to 1
and one from 1 to X. This makes T ′ contractible, and we can disentangle it from
T ′′ . Replacing the two new coupons again by f , we end up with an unknot Uf with
coupon f embedded in a 3-ball disjoint from T ′′ . One can now apply Proposition 3.10
with Tadm = Uf and Te = T ′′ .
□
We finish this section by showing that for C modular, see above (3.10), Lyubashenko’s invariant detects semisimplicity of C in the sense that the invariant of S 2 ×S 1
is non-zero if and only if C is semisimple.
Proposition 3.13. Let C be a modular tensor category. Then LyuΛ (S 2 × S 1 , ∅) ̸= 0
if and only if C is semisimple.
Proof. The surgery presentation of S 2 × S 1 is a zero-framed unknot. From this one
easily computes
LyuΛ (S 2 × S 1 , ∅) = εL ◦ Λ ,
see e.g. [Lyu, Sec. 5.3]. As C is modular, the Hopf pairing ωL is non-degenerate and
hence by (3.10) transforms the integral Λ into a cointegral,
εL ◦ Λ = ωL ◦ (Λ ⊗ ηL ) = ζ · Λco ◦ ηL .

(3.14)

It is shown in [Sh2, Prop. 5.6] that Λco ◦ ηL ̸= 0 if and only if C is semisimple. Note
that [Sh2] uses the so-called adjoint algebra A to define the integral of C while our
L∼
= A∗ as coalgebras in C and our cointegral Λco corresponds to Shimizu’s categorical
integral, by comparing (3.2) with [Sh2, Eq. (5.7)].
□
One source of modular tensor categories are Drinfeld centres Z(C) of pivotal finite
tensor categories C satisfying a sphericality condition, see [Sh5, Thm. 5.11], and these
centers allow for a non-degenerate two-sided modified trace on the ideal of projective
objects [GR3, Cor. 4.7]. It is thus useful to know when exactly such centres are
semisimple, or by Proposition 3.13, when the corresponding invariant of S 2 × S 1 is
non-zero. For this, recall first that the global dimension of a ribbon fusion category C
P
is dim C = U ∈Irr(C) (dimC U )2 . For C ribbon, semisimplicity of Z(C) and of C are
related as follows.
Lemma 3.14. For a ribbon finite tensor category C, the following are equivalent:

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

31

(1) The centre Z(C) is semisimple.
(2) C is semisimple and dim C ̸= 0.10
Proof. (2) ⇒ (1) is shown in [Mu, Thm. 1.2], see also [BV2, Cor. 2.4] which uses the
theory of Hopf monads [BV1]. For (1) ⇒ (2), we first show that C is semisimple. Since
C is braided, it embeds into Z(C) via a fully faithful monoidal functor. Explicitly,
the embedding sends objects X ∈ C to (X, cX,− ) with c the braiding in C. If Z(C)
is semisimple, therefore, C is equivalent to a full (replete) abelian subcategory of a
semisimple abelian category and hence itself semisimple abelian. In particular, C is a
ribbon fusion category. This, together with the assumption that Z(C) is semisimple,
implies that dim C ̸= 0 by [BV2, Cor. 2.3].
□
Remark 3.15. Suppose that C is non-semisimple and modular. As a consequence of
Proposition 3.13 we get that the Lyubashenko invariant LyuΛ of closed 3-manifolds
can not be extended to a (rigid) TFT, see e.g. the introduction of [Ke]. The reason
is that in a rigid TFT, the invariant of S 2 × S 1 gives the dimension of the state space
of S 2 . If this is zero, the TFT functor is zero on all non-empty bordisms as one can
always write such a bordism as a composition with a 3-ball, seen as a bordism ∅ → S 2 .
In particular, it would be zero on S 3 , but by construction LyuΛ (S 3 , ∅) = D −1 ̸= 0.
Nonetheless, one can construct a 3d TFT on a reduced set of so-called admissible
bordisms, we refer to [DGGPR1] for details.
△
3.4. Example: Lens spaces. For this section let us fix two coprime
n positive integers
3
p, q. The lens space L(p, q) is defined as the quotient of S = (z, w) ∈ C2 |z|2 +
o

|w|2 = 1 by the free Z/pZ action




k.(z, w) = e2πik/p z, e2πikq/p w .

(3.15)

Since S 3 is simply connected, it follows that the fundamental group of L(p, q) is Z/pZ,
and so the parameter p is an invariant of L(p, q). The parameter q on the other hand
is not, as the presentation above shows L(p, q) = L(p, q + p). See e.g. [PS, Ch. IV
§11] for more on lens spaces.
A surgery presentation of L(p, q) can be given as follows, see e.g. [PS, Ch. VI §17]
or [Lyu, Sec. 5.3].11 Fix a (generalised) continued fraction expression
1

an −
p
=
q

an−1 −

1
...

−

1
1
a2 −
a1

=: [an ; an−1 , . . . , a1 ],

ai ∈ Z .

(3.16)

10Over an algebraically closed field of characteristic 0, the global dimension is automatically

non-zero [EGNO, Thm. 7.21.12].
11One obtains an isotopic surgery link if one exchanges over- and underbraidings, so the surgery
descriptions of L(p, q) in [Lyu] and [PS] are the same. Similarly, one can reverse the order of
a1 , . . . , an .

32

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

Then we have the surgery presentation
L(p, q) =

(3.17)
a1

a2

an−1 an

in S . From now on, we will require the continued fraction expression to satisfy the
following
3

Assumption:

pi
:= [ai ; ai−1 , . . . , a1 ] > 0
qi

for i = 1, . . . , n .

(3.18)

This assumption can always be satisfied. For example, choose an to be the ceiling of
p
(smallest integer ≥ pq ). Then in the next step one starts from (an − pq )−1 ≥ 0. If
q
this is zero, one is done, else take an−1 to be its ceiling, and so on.
We will show in the appendix (Proposition A.1) that under the above assumption,
the signature of the surgery link in (3.17) is
σ = σ(L(p, q)) = n .

(3.19)

With these data fixed, we will consider two types of admissible bichrome graphs
embedded in the lens space L(p, q), corresponding to whether or not the graph is
contained within a ball. More precisely, let α ∈ End(idC ) and P ∈ I. Define the
bichrome graphs
L∗ (α, P ) =
a1

a2

αP

(3.20)

αP

(3.21)

an−1 an

and

L◦ (α, P ) =
a1

a2

an−1

an

in S 3 . Then we consider as manifold the lens space with embedded blue ribbon
graph obtained by surgery on the red part of the respective link, and denote it by the
same symbol as the link. Note that in L∗ (α, P ), the blue graph is embedded along
a contractible cycle, and that L′Λ, t (L∗ (α, T )) = L′Λ, t (L◦ (α, T )) for any transparent
object T .
Let C be unimodular and twist-nondegenerate, and recall the definition of SL , TL :
L → L from (3.5) and (3.6). To state the resulting invariants of L∗/◦ (α, P ), let us
define the morphism
f (a) =

1
Y
i=n







TLai ◦ SL (ηL ) = TLan ◦ SL ◦ . . . ◦ TLa1 ◦ SL (ηL ) ∈ C(1, L) ,

(3.22)

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

33

where we abbreviate a = (a1 , . . . , an ). We also need the natural transformation
Q : L ⊗ idC ⇒ idC with components determined by the dinatural transformation
id

∨ ⊗(cV,X cX,V )

ev

⊗ id

(3.23)

V
X ∨ XV −−X−−−−−−−−→ X ∨ XV −−X−−−→
V

for V ∈ C.
Proposition 3.16. Let C be unimodular and twist-nondegenerate, I ⊂ C a tensor
ideal with modified trace t, P ∈ I and α ∈ End(idC ). We have
L′Λ, t (L∗ (α, P )) = δ −σ D −1−n · tP (αP ) · εL ◦ f (a) ,




L′Λ, t (L◦ (α, P )) = δ −σ D −1−n · tP αP ◦ QP ◦ (f (a) ⊗ idP ) .
′
Proof. Let us start with L◦ (α, P ). To compute FΛ,
t , by the procedure in Section 3.2
we need to evaluate the n-dinatural transformation

(3.24)
a1

a2

an

P
and then compose with Λ ⊗ idP . Here we have disregarded the coupon αP , as
we may just reinsert it on top once we are done. Now one finds that this dinatural
transformation corresponds to the morphism
⊗n

Q

QP

Q

: L⊗n ⊗ P → P ,
T a1

T an−1

(3.25)

T an

where Q was defined in (3.4). From the explicit expression for SL in (3.5) it is easy to
see that SL ◦ ηL = Λ. Thus, precomposing the above morphism with Λ⊗n ⊗ idP and
replacing the first factor of Λ with SL ◦ ηL yields QP ◦ (f (a) ⊗ idP ). This establishes
the expression for L′Λ, t (L◦ (α, P )).
In order to obtain L′Λ, t (L∗ (α, P )) one simply repeats the above computation without the double braiding between L and P in (3.24). This amounts to replacing QP
in (3.25) by εL ⊗ idP .
□
Remark 3.17. By Corollary 3.12 we have
L′Λ, t (L∗ (α, P )) = tP (αP ) · LyuΛ (L(p, q)) .

(3.26)

Comparing to Proposition 3.16, we read off
LyuΛ (L(p, q)) = δ −σ D −1−n · εL ◦ f (a) ,

(3.27)

34

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

in agreement with [Lyu, Sec. 5.3], where this invariant was first computed. Strictly
speaking, we still need to show that tP (αP ) ̸= 0 for some choice of I, P and α. This
is the case e.g. for I = C, P = 1 and any α with α1 = id1 , or for I = Proj(C), P = P1
and the unique α ∈ End(idC ) which sends the top of P1 to its socle, and which is zero
on the projective covers of the other simples.
△
We end this section by computing the invariants in Proposition 3.16 in the example C = Q M, the representations of the symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf algebra
Q = Q(N, β) already mentioned in Section 2.5, and which will be described in detail in Section 4. In this example, C is modular (and hence twist-nondegenerate, see
the sentence before Remark 3.2), and we use the Lyubashenko integral with normalisation (3.11); this also fixes a canonical normalisation for the modified trace, see
Remark 3.2 (4).
Categorical trace. Let us start with the case where the ideal is I = C and we use the
categorical trace trC . By Definition 3.9, in this case we get the original Lyubashenko
invariant. We show in Section 7.3 that
LyuΛ (L(p, q)) = pN .

(3.28)

Including blue ribbons as in L∗/◦ (α, X) does not add anything new. Indeed, by
Corollary 3.8 it is enough to consider X ∈ C simple. There are four simple objects in
±
±
±
Q M, namely X0 and X1 . Of these, X1 are projective and so the invariant is zero
by Corollary 3.11 (where we choose T2 = ∅). The object X0+ is the tensor unit, and
since the Grothendieck class of its projective cover is [P0+ ] = 22N −1 ([X0+ ] + [X0− ]) (see
Section 5.2), the invariant of X0− must be minus that of X0+ . Altogether, for x = ∗, ◦,
LyuΛ (Lx (id, X0± )) = ±pN

,

LyuΛ (Lx (id, X1± )) = 0 .

In particular, LyuΛ cannot detect whether or not the blue ribbon wraps a nontrivial
cycle in L(p, q).
Relation to semisimplification. The result (3.28) suggests that for symplectic fermions,
the Lyubashenko invariant of a 3-manifold is just a classical invariant, namely the
order of the 1st homology group H1 (M ) of the manifold M , in power of the “rank”
of the category, N in our case. We conjecture that for all closed 3-manifolds M ,
LyuΛ (M ) =


0
|H1 (M )|N

; H1 (M ) infinite
; else

This fits into a series of results and conjectures on the relation between non-semisimple
and semisimple invariants. The first instance was proven in [CKS]: the Hennings invariant for small quantum sl(2) for an odd order root of unity is proportional to the
SO(3) Chern-Simons invariant at the corresponding level. The proportionality coefficient is |H1 (M )| if it is finite, and zero else. Related results and conjectures have been
given in [CYZ, CGP2, CDGS]. While similar, our case of C = Q M is not directly
covered by those previous observations. Indeed, it is the first higher rank example for
manifolds M which are not integer homology spheres (i.e. for which |H 1 (M )| > 1).

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

35

When comparing semisimple and non-semisimple invariants, one cannot just take
′
be the semisimplification obtained by
the semisimplification itself. Indeed, let Css
dividing out negligible morphisms, see [BW, Thm. 2.9], [Br, Prop. 1.4.2], [Vi, Sec. 3.4]
′
′
and [EO, Sec. 2]. The projection C → Css
is a ribbon functor. In Css
, indecomposable
objects of non-zero dimension become simple objects [EO, Prop. 2.4]. This may lead
to an uncountably infinite number of simples (this happens e.g. for Q M with N ≥ 2).
′
Instead, let use introduce the minimal semisimplification Css ⊂ Css
to be the full
subcategory tensor-generated by the images of the simple objects in C under the
projection.
The minimal semisimplification of C = Q M is Css = SVect. This category is not
modular but still twist-nondegenerate. Hence it defines Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants RTCss (M ) of closed three-manifolds M . With appropriate overall normalisation,
for Css = SVect these are all equal to one. Motivated by these examples, it would be
very interesting to see if the following general statement holds or not:
Let C be a modular tensor category. Then its semisimplification Css
is twist-nondegenerate and the corresponding invariants are related as
LyuΛ (M ) = |H1 (M )|n RTCss (M ) for some positive integer number n if
|H1 (M )| is finite. Otherwise LyuΛ (M ) is zero.
Modified trace on projective ideal. Next we turn to the projective ideal I = Proj(Q M).
There is no need to consider L∗ (α, P ) as by (3.26) the corresponding invariant is given
by LyuΛ (L(p, q)) times a topology-independent prefactor.
Recall from Section 2.5 that P0± denotes the projective cover of X0± . In the next
PN
theorem, by |t| for t ∈ ZN
2 we mean the sum
j=0 tj .
Theorem 3.18. We have




L′Λ, t (L◦ (id, P0± )) = ± 21 c0 + β 2 q N ,
where c0 ∈ {0} ∪ {β m |m ∈ Z}. Furthermore, for t ∈ ZN
2 with |t| ≥ 1, there are
αt ∈ End(idC ) (independent of p, q) such that
L′Λ, t (L◦ (αt , P0± )) = ±(−1)|t| β 2 2−|t|−1 p|t| q N −|t| .
The arduous proof will be presented in Theorem 7.9 below, which in fact contains
some additional invariants to those presented here.
Remark 3.19. We see that L′Λ, t (L◦ (id, P0± )) and L′Λ, t (L◦ (αt , P0± )) (for N ≥ 2 and
1 ≤ |t| ≤ N ) are not invariant under q ⇝ q + p, and so are not invariants of the lens
space L(p, q) but only of the lens space with the embedded ribbon loop.
△
Pullback trace on intermediate ideal. Finally, we also consider the intermediate ideal
A -Proj(H M) with pullback modified trace Res∗ (tA ), as in the computation of link
invariants in Section 2.5.
Theorem 3.20. Let H = Q(2, β), and consider the Mat2 (C)-indexed H-modules Pµ
already described in Section 2.5. Then
L′Λ, Res∗ (tA ) (L◦ (id, Pµ )) = −2pq(1 + det µ) ,

36

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

and there are αj,l ∈ End(idC ) (independent of p, q) with j, l = 1, 2 such that
L′Λ, Res∗ (tA ) (L◦ (αj,l , Pµ )) = p2 µj,l .
The above theorem is part of the more general statement in Theorem 7.12 where
also explicit expressions for the αj,l are given. Note that it is possible to recover the
matrix M uniquely by computing all four values of L′Λ, Res∗ (tA ) (L◦ (αj,l , Pµ )), thereby
distinguishing all modules Pµ .
This ends the first part of the paper, in which we set out general properties of the
non-semisimple link- and three-manifold invariants, and where we presented some
explicit results in the example of the symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf algebra.
In the second part of the paper we review the necessary background on quasiHopf algebras and provide the technical computations of the various invariants in the
symplectic fermion example.
4. Quasi-Hopf algebras, tensor ideals and modified traces
This section contains our conventions for quasi-Hopf algebras, as well as background material on pivotal structures, braidings, and ribbon structures. We discuss
modified traces and explain in detail how to define modified traces on tensor ideals
described by quasi-Hopf subalgebras.
4.1. Quasi-Hopf algebras and their modules. Our conventions for ribbon quasiHopf algebras follow [FGR1, BGR2].
4.1.1. Quasi-Hopf algebras. An algebra H is a quasi-Hopf algebra if it comes equipped
with elements α, β ∈ H, Φ ∈ H ⊗3 , and linear maps ∆ : H → H ⊗ H, ε : H → k,
and S : H → H satisfying the axioms described in this subsection. We denote the
unit of H by 1, or also by 1H if it can be confused with the tensor unit. Throughout
Section 4 we will assume that H is a finite-dimensional k-vector space.
We employ the sumless Sweedler notation to write
∆(h) = h(1) ⊗ h(2)

and (∆ ⊗ id)(∆(h)) = h(1,1) ⊗ h(1,2) ⊗ h(2) ,

etc., for h ∈ H. Similarly, for w ∈ H ⊗2 we write w = w1 ⊗ w2 , again with implicit
summation, and w21 = τ (w), where τ is the flip map in vector spaces. This notation
is extended to higher tensor powers in the obvious way.
The coproduct ∆ and the counit ε are required to be algebra maps. Furthermore,
the counit makes the coproduct counital. In Sweedler notation, these conditions read
(hg)(1) ⊗(hg)(2) = h(1) g(1) ⊗h(2) g(2) , ε(hg) = ε(h)ε(g) and ε(h(1) )h(2) = h = h(1) ε(h(2) )
for h, g ∈ H.
The coassociator Φ is invertible and we write Ψ = Φ−1 . The components of the
coassociator and its inverse will be written as
Φ = Φ1 ⊗ Φ2 ⊗ Φ3

and Ψ = Ψ1 ⊗ Ψ2 ⊗ Ψ3 ,

(4.1)

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

37

respectively. Further, it is normalised, i.e. (id ⊗ε ⊗ id)(Φ) = 1 ⊗ 1, it makes the
coproduct coassociative in the sense that (∆ ⊗ id)(∆(h)) · Φ = Φ · (id ⊗∆)(∆(h)) for
all h ∈ H, and it satisfies a cocycle condition
(∆ ⊗ id ⊗ id)(Φ) · (id ⊗ id ⊗∆)(Φ) = (Φ ⊗ 1) · (id ⊗∆ ⊗ id)(Φ) · (1 ⊗ Φ) .
Note that our conventions for Φ differ from those of e.g. [HN, BCPO] in that we use
the inverse coassociator.
Finally, the antipode S is an anti-algebra map, and together with the evaluation
and coevaluation elements α and β it satisfies
S(h(1) )αh(2) = ε(h)α,

h(1) βS(h(2) ) = ε(h)β ,

h ∈ H,

(4.2)

and
S(Φ1 )αΦ2 βS(Φ3 ) = 1,

Ψ1 βS(Ψ2 )αΨ3 = 1 .

(4.3)

From the last two axioms it is easy to see that one may always rescale α and β such
that ε(α) = 1 = ε(β).
We will also use the (co)opposite (co)multiplications µop = µ ◦ τ and ∆cop = τ ◦ ∆,
where τ is again the flip map in Vect.
4.1.2. Finite tensor category structure of H-modules. A left H-module is a left module V over the algebra H, and the action of h ∈ H on v ∈ V is denoted by h.v. We
write H M for the category of finite-dimensional left H-modules. It is a (non-strict)
finite tensor category: the monoidal product of two modules V, W is the vector space
V ⊗ W with the diagonal action h.(v ⊗ w) = h(1) .v ⊗ h(2) .w, and the associator of
this monoidal structure is
U ⊗ (V ⊗ W ) → (U ⊗ V ) ⊗ W,

u ⊗ v ⊗ w 7→ Φ1 .u ⊗ Φ2 .v ⊗ Φ3 .w .

Next we describe a rigid structure on H M. To this end, denote by
V ∗ × V → k,

(f, v) 7→ ⟨f | v⟩ := f (v)

the canonical pairing between a vector space V and its linear dual V ∗ . An H-module
V has both a left and a right dual. They are given by the dual vector space V ∗ , and
h ∈ H acts on the left dual V ∨ resp. the right dual ∨V by
(h.f )(v) = ⟨f | S(h).v⟩ resp. (h.f )(v) = ⟨f | S −1 (h).v⟩ ,
for v ∈ V , f ∈ V ∗ . The corresponding evaluation is given by12
evLV (f ⊗ v) = ⟨f | α.v⟩ resp.

−1
(α).v⟩ ,
evR
V (v ⊗ f ) = ⟨f | S

(4.4)

and the coevaluation by
coevLV (1) =

dim
XV
i=1

β.vi ⊗ v i

resp.

coevR
V (1) =

dim
XV

v i ⊗ S −1 (β).vi ,

(4.5)

i=1

where {vi } is a basis of V with corresponding dual basis {v i }. That these four maps
are indeed morphisms in the category is guaranteed by (4.2), and the zig-zag axioms
for H M follow from the zig-zag axioms (4.3) for H.
12The notation for the (co)evaluation morphisms given here differs from Section 2.1, as we will

later fix a convention adapted to a given pivotal structure, see (4.8) and (4.9) below.

38

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

4.1.3. Special elements and (co)integrals. A left integral for a quasi-Hopf algebra is
an element c ∈ H satisfying hc = ε(h)c for all h ∈ H. In other words, c ∈ H M(1, H),
regarding H as the left regular representation. One similarly defines right integrals.
It is well-known that, in the finite-dimensional case, left (right) integrals exist and
span a one-dimensional space. A priori, left and right integrals are different; by
dimension considerations, if c is a left integral, then ch = γ(h)c for all h ∈ H, where
γ ∈ H ∗ is an algebra morphism called the modulus of H. Then a left integral is a
right integral if and only if γ = ε, in which case one says that H is unimodular.13
The dual notion of left/right cointegrals for H is more involved [HN], since the
(linear) dual of a quasi-Hopf algebra is not a quasi-Hopf algebra in general. Following
[Dr], define the elements
q R = Ψ1 ⊗ S −1 (αΨ3 )Ψ2 ,

pR = Φ1 ⊗ Φ2 βS(Φ3 ),

q L = S(Φ1 )αΦ2 ⊗ Φ3 ,

pL = Ψ2 S −1 (Ψ1 β) ⊗ Ψ3 ,

(4.6)

which satisfy a number of useful identities, see e.g. [BGR2, Sec. 3.4] for a list in
our conventions and [BGR1, Sec. 3] for a representation in graphical calculus. With
these, one may describe the Drinfeld twist f of H, i.e. the invertible element in
H ⊗ H implementing the natural isomorphism W ∨ ⊗ V ∨ ∼
= (V ⊗ W )∨ in H M, see
e.g. [BGR2, Sec. 3.4] for an explicit expression.
With the application to link and three-manifold invariants in mind, we will in the
following restrict ourselves to the case that H is unimodular. In that case, a linear
form λr on H is a right cointegral, resp. λl a left cointegral, if and only if it satisfies








(λr ⊗ id) V cop ∆(h)U cop = λr (h)1 resp. (id ⊗λl ) V ∆(h)U = λl (h)1

(4.7)

for all h ∈ H, see [HN, BC1, BC2] and [BGR1, Def. 3.2] for a definition in our
conventions. The elements U (cop) , V (cop) ∈ H ⊗ H are defined as
R
U = f −1 (S ⊗ S)(q21
),

V = (S −1 ⊗ S −1 )(f 21 pR
21 ),

L −1
U cop = (S −1 ⊗ S −1 )(q21
f 21 ), V cop = (S ⊗ S)(pL21 )f 21 .

4.1.4. Pivotal structure, braiding, and ribbon structure on H M. Here, we briefly review results on pivotal structures, braidings and ribbon twists. For more details we
refer to [EGNO] for the categorical structures, and to [BCPO] for their quasi-Hopf
algebra counterparts.
Recall that a pivotal structure on a rigid monoidal category is a monoidal natural
isomorphism idC ⇒ (−)∨∨ . A pivot for H is an invertible element g ∈ H satisfying
S 2 (h) = ghg −1 and ∆(g) = f −1 · (S ⊗ S)(f 21 ) · (g ⊗ g). A pivotal quasi-Hopf algebra
is a quasi-Hopf algebra together with chosen pivot.
Proposition 4.1. There is a bijective correspondence


pivotal structures ∼
pivots
−
−
→
on H M
for H ,






Vect −1
δ 7−→ (δH
) (δH (1)),

13The modulus may be identified with the one-dimensional socle of P

1 [EGNO, Sec. 6.5].

H is unimodular if and only if H M is unimodular.

Thus

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

39

where δVVect is the canonical isomorphism V ∼
= V ∗∗ of vector spaces. The inverse
maps g to the pivotal structure δV (v) = δVVect (g.v). A pivot satisfies ε(g) = 1 and
S(g) = g −1 .
In the pivotal case we will choose the (co)evaluation maps in H M such that they
are related by the pivotal structure. Our convention is to define the two-sided dual
to be V ∨ . Accordingly we take the left (co)evaluation map from (4.4), (4.5) and we
write
evV := evLV

,

coevV := coevLV .

(4.8)

g V.
The right-duality on V ∨ is given by efvV := evLV ∨ ◦(δV ⊗ idV ∨ ) and similar for coev
Explicitly,

efvV (v ⊗ f ) = ⟨f | S(α)g.v⟩ ,

g V (1) =
coev

dim
XV

v i ⊗ S −1 (gβ).vi .

(4.9)

i=1

An R-matrix for H is an invertible element R ∈ H ⊗ H satisfying (∆ ⊗ id)(R) =
Ψ231 R13 Φ132 R23 Ψ, (id ⊗∆)(R) = Φ312 R13 Ψ213 R12 Φ and R∆(h)R−1 = ∆cop (h). A
quasi-triangular quasi-Hopf algebra is a quasi-Hopf algebra together with a chosen
R-matrix.
Proposition 4.2. There is a bijective correspondence




braidings ∼ R-matrices
−
→
, c 7−→ τ ◦ cH,H (1 ⊗ 1)
on H M
for H
where τ is the flip map in Vect. The inverse maps R to the braiding cX,Y (x ⊗ y) =
R2 .y ⊗ R1 .x.
Associated to an R-matrix is also its monodromy M = R21 R, which encodes the
double braiding in H M. Lastly, since H M is rigid, there is a canonical (but in
general non-monoidal) natural isomorphism idC ⇒ (−)∨∨ built using left dualities
and a braiding; it is completely determined by an element u ∈ H, called the Drinfeld element of H, see e.g. [FGR1, Sec. 6.3] for an explicit expression in the current
conventions.
Finally, recall that a ribbon twist on a braided rigid monoidal category is a natural
automorphism of the identity functor, satisfying certain axioms. A ribbon element for
H is a non-zero central element v ∈ H satisfying ∆(v) = M−1 · v ⊗ v and S(v) = v.
A ribbon quasi-Hopf algebra is a quasi-Hopf algebra together with a chosen ribbon
element.
Proposition 4.3 ([So]). A ribbon element is automatically invertible and satisfies
ε(v) = 1, and there is a bijective correspondence




ribbon twists ∼ ribbon elements
−
→
, ϑ 7→ (ϑH )−1 (1) .
on H M
for H
The inverse maps v to the ribbon twist ϑV (v) = v −1 .v.
Since a ribbon category is pivotal, a ribbon Hopf algebra admits a canonical pivot
which is compatible with the ribbon structure. In terms of the ribbon and Drinfeld
element, it is explicitly given by g = uv −1 .

40

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

4.2. Modified traces on H M and Proj(H M). Let (H, g) be a pivotal quasi-Hopf
algebra.
4.2.1. The categorical trace. From (4.8) and (4.9) one finds that the right resp. left
categorical trace of C = H M is given by
trr,C
V (f ) = trV (gβS(α) ◦ f )



resp.

−1
trl,C
(gβ) ◦ f
V (f ) = trV αS



(4.10)

for f ∈ EndH (V ), where by h = gβS(α) we mean the linear endomorphism of V
given by acting with h, and tr on the right hand sides is the usual trace of linear
maps. If H is ribbon then both the categorical traces agree.
4.2.2. The modified trace on the projective ideal. Next, consider I = Proj(H M), the
subcategory of projective H-modules. Since non-degenerate modified traces do not
exist in the non-unimodular setting [FOG, GKP3], we now restrict to the case that
H is unimodular. Building on [BBG], in [BGR1] it was shown that non-degenerate
b r ∈ H∗
right (resp. left) modified traces on I are in bijection with linear forms λ
b l ∈ H ∗ ) satisfying
(resp. λ




b r ⊗ id) q R ∆(h)pR = λ
b r (h)g −1
(λ





b l ) q L ∆(h)pL = λ
b l (h)g
resp. (id ⊗λ

(4.11)

for all h ∈ H. Moreover, the unique (up to scalar) solutions to these equations are
given by
b r (h) = λr (gh) resp. λ
b l (h) = λl (g −1 h),
λ

h∈H ,

(4.12)

where λr (resp. λl ) is a non-zero right (resp. left) cointegral of H defined via (4.7).
Such a solution is then called a right (resp. left) symmetrised cointegral for H, the
name reflecting the fact that it is a symmetric form associated to a cointegral.
Let us describe explicitly the right modified trace associated to the right symb r . By linearity of the modified trace it is enough to consider
metrised cointegral λ
endomorphisms of indecomposable projective modules, or more generally, any direct
summand of the regular H-module H. So let P ∈ H M be a direct summand in
p
i
H via the split idempotent H →
− P →
− H. The associated right modified trace of
f ∈ EndH (P ) is given by








b r (i ◦ f ◦ p)(1) = λr g · (i ◦ f ◦ p)(1) ,
trP (f ) = λ

(4.13)

and is independent of the choice of i and p with p ◦ i = idP , see [BGR1, Prop. 4.3 &
b r by the left symmetrised cointegral λ
b l yields the left modThm. 4.5]. Replacing λ
ified trace. Note that if H is ribbon, then there is no difference between left and
right modified traces, and so the left and right symmetrised cointegrals agree. The
corresponding left and right cointegrals do not have to agree (but they do e.g. if g
has order 2).
A special case of (4.13), which will often appear later, is when f is a component of
a natural transformation ξ ∈ End(idC ). It is well-known that End(idC ) is isomorphic
to the centre Z(H) of H; in fact, ξ is given by the action with ξˆ = ξH (1) ∈ Z(H).
ˆ where e = (i ◦ p)(1) is the idempotent of the direct
Then we have trP (ξP ) = λr (g ξe)
summand P in H.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

41

4.3. Lyubashenko coend and integral. Let H be a quasi-triangular quasi-Hopf
algebra, so that H M is braided. The Hopf algebra L (as recalled in Section 3.1)
exists and is given by the coadjoint representation — i.e. L ∼
= H ∗ as vector spaces,
with action given by (h.f )(v) = f (S(h(1) )vh(2) ) for f ∈ H ∗ and h, v ∈ H — together
with the universal dinatural transformation with components
jX (x∗ ⊗ y)(h) = x∗ (hy)

(4.14)

for X ∈ H M, x∗ ∈ X ∨ , y ∈ X, and h ∈ H. See [FGR1, Sec. 7] for more details.
Let now H be unimodular. This is equivalent to H M being unimodular, and so
L admits a two-sided integral Λ : 1 → L, which in the present case translates into
Λ ∈ H ∗ . It was shown in [BGR2, Cor. 6.4] that given a non-zero right cointegral λr
for H, a non-zero integral Λ for L is obtained as Λ(h) = λr (S(β)h). This is in fact
a bijection with inverse
λr (h) = Λ(S(q1L )hq2L ) .

(4.15)

The condition (3.7) for twist-nongedeneracy of H M can be expressed in terms of
quasi-Hopf data as follows. By [FGR1, Eqn. (8.3)], the endomorphism TL : L → L
from (3.6) acts on f ∈ L = H ∗ as (TL (f ))(a) = f (v −1 a), where a ∈ H. The counit
εL : L → 1 is given by εL (f ) = f (α) for f ∈ H ∗ , see [FGR1, Thm. 7.3]. Combining
this with the above expression for the integral Λ, we obtain
H M twist-nondegenerate

∆± = λr (S(β)v ∓1 α) ̸= 0 .

⇔

(4.16)

We call quasi-Hopf algebras satisfying the non-vanishing condition on the right hand
side of (4.16) twist-nondegenerate.
Recall from Remark 3.1 the condition for a unimodular braided finite tensor category to be factorisable. We call the unimodular quasi-triangular quasi-Hopf algebra
H factorisable if H M is factorisable. A characterisation in terms of quasi-Hopf data
was given in [FGR1, Sec. 7.3] and agrees with the original definition in [BT] as shown
in [FGR1, Sec. 7.4].
Next we explain that two a priori different looking ways of normalising the modified
trace on the projective ideal in terms of the integral Λ actually agree. We start by
fixing an arbitrary non-zero integral Λ : 1 → L. In case H is modular, one can
further fix Λ up to a sign by demanding Remark 3.2 (1), but here we do not assume
this.
From (4.15) and (4.12), one obtains a (two-sided) symmetrised cointegral by setting
r
b
λ (h) = Λ(S(q1L )ghq2L ). Via (4.13) this in turn fixes a modified trace tHopf on the
projective ideal. Altogether, we have determined tHopf from the initial choice of Λ.
This Hopf algebraic normalisation condition has a categorical counterpart:
Remark 4.4. Assume for this remark that C is modular. Given Λ, there is a unique
cointegral Λco for L such that Λco ◦ Λ = id1 , cf. (3.3). Fix a surjection (unique up to
scalar) p1 : P1 → 1. By [GR3, Prop. 6.5], this yields a unique morphism ν1 : 1 → P1
such that




Λco ◦ jP1 = evP1 ◦ idP1∨ ⊗(ν1 ◦ p1 ) .

(4.17)

42

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

Note that the composition ν1 ◦ p1 is independent of the choice of p1 . From [GR3,
Thm. 6.1 & Prop. 6.5] it follows that for a non-zero modified trace t on Proj(C) one
has tP1 (ν1 ◦ p1 ) ̸= 0. We may thus normalise t such that
tP1 (ν1 ◦ p1 ) = 1 .

(4.18)

This is the same condition as in Remark 3.2 (4), again by [GR3, Prop. 6.5]. Altogether, starting from Λ we obtained a unique choice of modified trace t on Proj(C).
△
Let us return to the unimodular quasi-triangular quasi-Hopf algebra H. We have:
Lemma 4.5. tHopf satisfies (4.18).
Note that this holds without assuming that H M is modular.
Proof. Denote by i and π a choice of morphisms in H M which give the injection and
projection of P1 in H. The map i is unique up to scalar as P1 is also an injective hull
of 1 and the space of H-intertwiners from 1 to H H is the space of left integrals and
hence one-dimensional. Fix the morphism p1 = ε◦i : P1 → 1 and let ν1 be determined
by (4.17). To describe ν1 more explicitly, first note that by [FGR1, Prop. 7.8] there
is a unique choice of integral c ∈ H of H such that the cointegral Λco ∈ H ∗∗ of L
satisfies Λco = ⟨−|c⟩. A short calculation using the normalisation ε(α) = 1 shows
that ν1 = π(c) (viewing π(c) ∈ P1 as a linear map k → P1 ) satisfies (4.17). Note
b r (c) = Λ(c) = Λco ◦ Λ = 1. Altogether we have (here we write 1 ∈ H
further that λ
H
for the unit of H to distinguish it from the tensor unit 1 of H M)
br
br
tHopf
P1 (ν1 ◦ p1 ) = λ ((i ◦ ν1 ◦ p1 ◦ π)(1H )) = ε(e1 )λ (c) = 1 ,

where e1 = (i ◦ π)(1H ). The last equality follows from the fact that the counit
is only non-zero on the idempotent corresponding to the tensor unit in an isotypic
decomposition of the regular module, which implies 1 = ε(1H ) = ε(e1 ).
□
4.4. Pullback ideals from quasi-Hopf subalgebras. For any quasi-Hopf algebra
H, a linear subspace A ⊂ H is a quasi-Hopf subalgebra if it is a (unital) subalgebra,
such that ∆(A) ⊂ A⊗A and S(A) ⊂ A, and which moreover contains the coassociator
in the sense that Φ ∈ A⊗3 . Denote by
Res = ResH
A : H M → AM
the canonical (forgetful) restriction functor, and note that it is strict monoidal. We
say that an A-module M lifts to the H-module N if Res N ∼
= M as A-modules.
Given a quasi-Hopf subalgebra A ⊂ H, we may now consider the category of Aprojective H-modules. This is the full subcategory A -Proj(H M) of H M consisting of
H-modules which are projective as A-modules, i.e. its objects are precisely the lifts of
projective A-modules. In other words, it is a pullback in the sense of Proposition 2.11,




A -Proj(H M) = Res∗ Proj(A M) ,
and so in particular, A -Proj(H M) is a tensor ideal in H M.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

43

Since every ideal contains the projective ideal (cf. Proposition 2.4), we have the
following chain of ideals14
Proj(H M) ⊂ A -Proj(H M) ⊂ H M .

(4.19)

We also remark that the two extremes in (4.19) are precisely the H-projective and
the k-projective H-modules.
Let now A ⊂ H be a unimodular quasi-Hopf subalgebra of the pivotal quasi-Hopf
algebra (H, g). If g ∈ A, then (A, g) is a unimodular pivotal quasi-Hopf algebra,
and thus admits a non-degenerate right modified trace tA on Proj(A M), constructed
via its right symmetrised cointegral. The same holds for the left version. As a
further application of Proposition 2.11 we now get a modified trace on A -Proj(H M)
by pulling back tA along the restriction functor. Together with (4.13), we obtain a
quasi-Hopf generalisation of [FOG, Cor. 2.8]:
b A ∈ A∗ be a right (left)
Corollary 4.6. Abbreviate I(A) = A -Proj(H M), and let λ
symmetrised cointegral for A, with corresponding right (left) modified trace tA on
Proj(A M). For M ∈ I(A), the family of linear maps

(Res∗ (tA ))M : EndI(A) (M ) → k,

(Res∗ (tA ))M (f ) = tA
Res M (f ) ,

defines a right (left) modified trace on I(A). Explicitly, with 1A the unit of A,
(Res∗ (tA ))M (f ) =

n
X

b
λ

A



(pi ◦ f ◦ ji )(1A ) ,

i=1

where n is a natural number and pi : Res M → A, ji : A → Res M are A-module
P
morphisms, for i = 1, ..., n, such that ni=1 ji ◦ pi = idM and pl ◦ jm = δl,m pl ◦ jl .
Remark 4.7. Suppose H is ribbon. In light of Remark 2.7, the pullback modified
trace from Corollary 4.6 is then always two-sided, even if Proj(A M) has distinct right
and left modified traces tA,r and tA,l . In the example we consider below, tA,r and tA,l
are not proportional, but the two pullback traces still turn out to agree up to a scalar
(Proposition 5.8 and Corollary 5.10).
△
Remark 4.8. Every finite-dimensional right H-comodule algebra A gives a right Cmodule category A M for C = H M with the action functor ⃝
< exact in both variables.
In particular, this holds for a right coideal subalgebra I ⊂ H. By Remark 2.12,
such an A and a left A-module M provide a C-linear functor FM : H M → A M,
∗
X 7→ M ⊗ X. The pullback FM
Proj(A M) therefore is a right tensor ideal in H-mod.
However, less is known about existence of traces on Proj(A M), as compared to pivotal
Hopf subalgebras treated in Corollary 4.6. For example, we are not aware of analogues
of symmetrised right cointegral expression, as in [BBG, FOG, BGR1].
△
14To see this without Proposition 2.4, recall that H is free as an A-module by the Nichols-Zoeller

theorem for quasi-Hopf algebras [Sch]. In particular, every projective indecomposable H-module
restricts to a direct summand of a free A-module; since Proj(H M) is generated by indecomposable
projectives, we get the inclusion of ideals as in (4.19).

44

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

5. The symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf algebras
After presenting some general aspects of the theory of quasi-Hopf algebras, we now
turn to the family of examples which we will use to evaluate link and three-manifold
invariants. These are the symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf algebras, which in fact are
ribbon and factorisable. They were constructed in [GR1, FGR2] to reproduce the
ribbon finite tensor categories obtained in [DR, Ru] from the study of the chiral twodimensional logarithmic conformal field theory of symplectic fermions [Ka, GK, Ab].
5.1. Quasi-Hopf algebra and ribbon structure. Here we define the family Q(N, β)
of symplectic fermion quasi-Hopf algebras, give the ribbon structure on Q(N, β) and
compute its (co)integrals. The two parameters are a natural number N ≥ 1 and
a complex number β s.t. β 4 = (−1)N . We fix such an N and β and abbreviate
Q = Q(N, β).
5.1.1. Quasi-Hopf algebra structure. As an algebra, Q is the (unital associative) Calgebra generated by { K, fiϵ | 1 ≤ i ≤ N, ϵ = ± }. With the elements e0 = 12 (1 + K2 )
and e1 = 12 (1 − K2 ), the relations of Q are
{fi± , K} = 0 ,

{fi+ , fj− } = δi,j e1 ,

{fi± , fj± } = 0 ,

K4 = 1 ,

for all 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N , and where {−, −} is the anticommutator. Then e0 , e1 satisfy
e0 + e1 = 1, and are central orthogonal idempotents. A basis is given by
{b(m, s, t) = Km

N
Y

(fj+ )sj (fj− )tj | m ∈ Z4 , s, t ∈ ZN
2 } ,

(5.1)

j=1

and the dimension of Q is 22N +2 . On generators, the coproduct and counit are
∆(K) = K ⊗ K − (1 + (−1)N ) e1 K ⊗ e1 K ,

ε(K) = 1 ,

∆(fi± ) = fi± ⊗ 1 + ω± ⊗ fi± ,

ε(fi± ) = 0 ,

(5.2)

where ω± = (e0 ± ie1 )K. With β ± = e0 + β 2 (±iK)N e1 , the coassociator and its
inverse are
n

Φ±1 = 1 ⊗ 1 ⊗ 1 + e1 ⊗ e1 ⊗ e0 (KN − 1) + e1 (β ± − 1)

o

.

(5.3)

Finally, the antipode S and the evaluation and coevaluation elements α and β are
given by
N

S(K) = K(−1) = (e0 + (−1)N e1 )K ,

α=1,

S(fi± ) = fi± (e0 ± (−1)N ie1 )K ,

β = β+ .

The inverse of the antipode is found to be
N

S −1 (K) = K(−1) ,

S −1 (fi± ) = ω± fi± .

Note that S(β ± ) = S −1 (β ± ) = β ∓ , and β + β − = 1.
The algebra Q is the direct sum of two ideals Qi = ei Q, i = 0, 1. As algebras, Q0
(resp. Q1 ) is the semidirect product of a Grassmann algebra (resp. Clifford algebra)
in 2N generators with the group algebra of Z2 . In particular, Q1 is semisimple. This
decomposition imparts a Z2 -grading on the category of Q-modules: Q M = (Q M)0 ⊕

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

45

(Q M)1 . Since Q1 is semisimple, (Q M)1 is semisimple as an abelian (sub)category.
The monoidal structure on Q M respects the grading, see [FGR2, Sec. 3] for details.
5.1.2. Further elements and structure. In [BGR1, Sec. 5], the canonical elements from
(4.6) were computed to be








q R = 1 ⊗ 1 + e1 ⊗ e1 (β − 1) ,
pR = 1 ⊗ 1 + e0 ⊗ e1 (β − 1) ,
n

o

q L = 1 ⊗ 1 + e1 ⊗ e0 (KN − 1) + e1 (β − 1) ,
n

o

pL = β − ⊗ 1 + e1 β − ⊗ e0 (KN − 1) + e1 (β − − 1) .

(5.4)

The Drinfeld twist and its inverse are given by
f ±1 = e0 ⊗ 1 + e1 ⊗ e0 KN + e1 β ∓ ⊗ e1 .

(5.5)

Q is quasi-triangular. The R-matrix and its inverse are
R=

N
 Y

1
 X

β nm ρn,m en ⊗ em ·

n,m=0

(1 ⊗ 1 − 2fj− ω− ⊗ fj+ )

j=1

and
R−1 =

N
Y

(1 ⊗ 1 + 2fj− ω− ⊗ fj+ ) ·

1
 X



β −nm ρn,m en ⊗ em ,

n,m=0

j=1

where
ρn,m =

1
1 X
(−1)kl i−kn+lm Kk ⊗ Kl .
2 k,l=0

Its monodromy may be described as
M = R21 R =

X

for I = (a, b, c, d)

gI ⊗ fI ,

(5.6)

I

with a, b ∈ Z2 and c, d ∈ ZN
2 , and where
fI = Ka eb

N
Y

(fk− )dk (fk+ )ck .

k=1

gI = (−β 2 )ab 2|c|+|d| (−1)|c|+b|d| Kb ea

N
Y

(fk+ ω− )dk (fk− ω− )ck ,

(5.7)

k=1

see [FGR2, Lem. 4.2]. This is used there to further show that the Hopf pairing ωL in
(3.1) is non-degenerate, i.e. that Q M is factorisable.
Finally, Q is ribbon with (inverse) ribbon element
v

±1

= (e0 − β

±1

iKe1 )

N 
Y

1 ∓ 2(e0 ± e1 )fj+ fj−

j=1



(5.8)

46

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

and so Q M is a modular tensor category. The pivot compatible with the ribbon
structure is
g = (e0 + (−i)N +1 e1 KN )K .

(5.9)

Note that g −1 = g.
5.1.3. Integrals
and cointegrals. In the basis (5.1), any left integral of Q is a scalar
P
multiple of 3m=0 b(m, 1, 1), where by 1 ∈ ZN
2 we mean the vector with 1 everywhere.
15
Since Q is unimodular , all left integrals of Q are also right integrals. In [BGR1,
Sec. 5] it was shown that the left (and, since H is ribbon, also right) symmetrised
cointegral yielding the non-degenerate modified trace on Proj(H M) satisfies
2
m
b r (b(m, 1, 1)) = λ
b l (b(m, 1, 1)) = c δ
λ
t m,odd (β + i ) ,

(5.10)

and is zero on the other basis elements. The normalisation coefficient where ct ∈ C
will be determined shortly. By δm,odd we mean the Kronecker delta modulo 2, i.e.
δm,odd = 1 if m is odd and 0 otherwise. The corresponding left (and, since g has
order 2, also right) cointegral for H is given by
λr (b(m, 1, 1)) = λl (b(m, 1, 1))


= ct δm,even (β 2 + δN,even im ) + δm,odd δN,odd im



(5.11)

and zero elsewhere.
We now determine the coefficient ct . The integral Λ of L in the normalisation
ωL ◦ (Λ ⊗ Λ) = id1 was computed in [FGR2] to be




Λ b(m, 1, 1) = ν(−1)N β 2 2−(N −1) δm,0 ,

(5.12)

where ν ∈ {±1} is the remaining sign freedom. We will for simplicity from now on
choose ν = 1. As in Section 4.3 we normalise the cointegral λr of Q by Λ(h) =
λr (S(β)h). One computes λr (S(β)b(m, 1, 1)) = ct 2β 2 δm,0 , whence
ct = (−1)N 2−N .

(5.13)

Evaluating (3.7) as in (4.16) gives


 (5.8)

∆± = εL ◦ T ±1 ◦ Λ = λr S(β)v ∓1 α

= β ∓2 ,

which implies D 2 = ∆− ∆+ = 1, and we choose D = 1. Then we have δ = β −2 for
the anomaly of Q M.
5.2. The modular tensor category Q M. Here we briefly discuss the simple and
projective modules of Q M and give their internal characters. Then we show that
Q M does not factorise into a product of modular tensor categories. While we will
not use this fact later on, we still think it is a noteworthy observation.
15This follows from the explicit form of P

1 given in Section 5.2.1 below. Or one can use that Q
is factorisable which implies unimodularity, see [BT, Sec. 6] for the quasi-Hopf algebra result, and
[KL, Lem. 5.2.8] for the general categorical statement.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

47

5.2.1. Simple and projective modules. The simple and projective modules of Q have
been computed in [FGR2, Sec. 3.7]. One finds that Q has four simple modules which
we denote by X0± ∈ (Q M)0 and X1± ∈ (Q M)1 .
The simple modules X0± are one-dimensional. They are distinguished by the action
of K, which acts as ±1 on X0± . The tensor unit of Q M is given by X0+ . As submodules
of Q, the projective covers P0± of X0± are generated by the primitive (non-central)
idempotents
1
e±
0 = 2 (1 ± K)e0 .

(5.14)

They are both 22N -dimensional, and the spaces of intertwiners from P0ε to P0δ have
dimension 22N −1 for ε, δ ∈ {+, −}.
The simple modules X1± are 2N -dimensional and projective, and K acts on their
highest weight state as ±i. As X1± is projective, it can be realised as a direct summand
of Q. The corresponding central (non-primitive) idempotents give 2N copies of X1± .
Namely, 2N X1± ⊂ Q is the image of
1
e±
1 = e1
2



1 ∓ iK

N
Y



(1 − 2fj+ fj− ) .

(5.15)

j=1

Remark 5.1. Since Q M is factorisable, it has no transparent objects other than
direct sums of the tensor unit (see [Sh3] for equivalent characterisations of factorisability). The grade-0 component (Q M)0 is also a braided finite tensor category, but
it is not factorisable. The transparent objects in (Q M)0 are precisely all finite direct
sums of X0+ and X0− , see [DR, Prop. 5.3]. That X0− is transparent in (Q M)0 can
also be easily read off from the monodromy matrix M in (5.6). Namely, when acting
on V ⊗ X0− for any V ∈ (Q M)0 , in the sum over I in M, only the summand with
N
I = 0 ∈ Z2 × Z 2 × Z N
2 × Z2 contributes, and this summand acts as the identity on
V ⊗ X0− .
△
The tensor product closes on the set of simples and projectives, explicitly we have
(see [FGR2, Sec. 2.2])
X1ε ⊗ X1δ ∼
= P0εδ ,

X0ε ⊗ Y δ ∼
= Y εδ where Y ∈ {X0 , X1 , P0 } ,

In the Grothendieck ring Gr(Q M) of Q M, we have [P0ε ] = 22N −1 ([X0+ ] + [X0− ]), so
that the above tensor products result in the following product for the generators of
Gr(Q M):
[X0δ ] · [X0ε ] = [X0δε ] ,


[X0δ ] · [X1ε ]= [X1δε ] ,


[X1δ ] · [X1ε ] = 22N −1 [X0+ ] + [X0− ] .

(5.16)

5.2.2. Internal characters and their S-transformation. Recall from Remark 3.2 that
End(idC ) is equipped with an action of SL(2, Z), and that there are special natural
transformations ϕV and SC (ϕV ) for any V ∈ C. It is known from [FS, Sh2] (see [GR2,
Sec. 3] for a summary) that the map
Gr(C) → End(idC ) ,

[V ] 7→ SC (ϕV )

(5.17)

48

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

is an injective ring homomorphism. This fact has been used in [GR2, Thm. 3.9] to
give a non-semisimple variant of the Verlinde formula.
For any algebra A, End(idA M ) is canonically isomorphic to Z(A), the centre of A.
In the case of Q, the central elements χV and ϕV corresponding to SC (ϕV ) and ϕV ,
respectively, have been worked out in [FGR2, Sec. 4.4]. Since χV , ϕV depend on V
only through the class in Gr(Q M), knowing them on simple modules is enough:
ϕX0± = 2N +1 β 2 e±
0

N
Y

fj+ fj− ,

j=1

ϕX1± = ±2N +1 e±
1

(5.18)

−
fj+ fj− + 2N (e+
1 − e1 ) .

(5.19)

and
χX0± = e1 ± e0 ,

χX1± = ±β 4 e0 K
2 N

N
Y
j=1

As an immediate consequence of (5.17), the map Gr(Q M) → Z(Q), [V ] 7→ χV is
an injective ring homomorphism, and thus has to agree with the product given in
(5.16). Indeed, we have, for example
χX0− χX + = χX1− ,
1

−
2N −1
(χX + + χX0− ) .
(χX + )2 = 22N (e+
1 + e1 ) = 2
1

0

5.2.3. Primality of Q M. Recall from e.g. [LW] that a topologising subcategory of an
abelian category A is a full subcategory closed under finite direct sums and subquotients in A. Recall further that the Müger centralizer MA (X ) of a class of objects X
in the braided monoidal category A is the full subcategory consisting of those objects
in A which have trivial monodromy (i.e. double braiding) with every object in X .
Note that for a braided tensor category C, we have MC (1) ∼
= C, and if C is factorisable
also MC (C) ∼
Vect
(see
[Sh3]).
=
In [LW], the following remarkable theorem was shown, extending Müger’s result to
the non-semisimple case. Before restating it, let us remark that a tensor subcategory
of a tensor category C is a subcategory closed under tensor products and containing
the tensor unit.
Theorem 5.2 ([LW, Thm. 4.17]). Let C be a modular tensor category, and let D be a
topologising tensor subcategory of C. If D is factorisable with respect to the braiding
inherited from C, then C ∼
= D ⊠ MC (D) as ribbon categories.
This leads to the notion of prime modular tensor categories as those modular tensor
categories C which do not admit a proper non-trivial (i.e. not equivalent to C or Vect)
factorisable topologising tensor subcategory.
We can now show that symplectic fermions provide a prime example of such a
category.
Proposition 5.3. The modular tensor category Q M is prime.
Proof. Let D be a factorisable topologising tensor subcategory of Q M which is not
Vect. We will show that then already D = Q M.
We start by showing that D contains the four simple objects of Q M. It contains
1 = X0+ by definition. Since we assume D ̸= Vect, and there are no self-extensions
of the tensor unit [EGNO, Sec. 4.4], it must contain at least one more simple object.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

49

Since D is factorisable, it cannot be wholly contained in (Q M)0 . Otherwise, it
would necessarily contain X0− , the only simple object of (Q M)0 that is not the tensor
unit. But we have seen in Remark 5.1 that X0− is transparent in (Q M)0 .
Therefore, D must contain at least one of X1± . Suppose it contains X1+ . Since
X1+ ⊗ X1+ ∼
= P0+ contains X0+ and X0− as subquotients, we have by topologising
property that X0− ∈ D. Since X1+ ⊗ X0− = X1− , D then also contains X1− . Finally,
X1+ ⊗ X1− ∼
= P0− , and so D contains all projectives and hence is equal to Q M. The
argument starting from X1− instead of X1+ is the same.
□
One consequence of Proposition 5.3 is that Q M is not a product of more elementary
modular tensor categories, and in particular one cannot directly reduce the study of
general N to the N = 1 case, see however an interesting observation in [MR, Rem. 5.6].
5.3. Pullback ideals. In this section we consider an example of a pull back ideal
and compute the resulting modified trace. We start with some general comments on
quasi-Hopf subalgebras of Q(N, β) and then specialise to a specific subalgebra A in
H := Q(2, β).
5.3.1. Quasi-Hopf subalgebras in Q. Write W + ⊂ Q = Q(N, β) for the N -dimensional vector space linearly spanned by the fi+ , and analogously for W − . The total
space W + ⊕ W − carries a symplectic form given by (fi+ , fj− ) = δi,j .
Before turning to the specific example we will study in more detail, let us look more
generally at quasi-Hopf subalgebras A generated by some subspace of W + ⊕ W − and
by powers of K. First note that for w = w+ + w− ∈ W + ⊕ W − , the coproduct (5.2)
gives
∆(w) = w ⊗ 1 + e0 ⊗ w + ie1 ⊗ (w+ − w− ) .
(5.20)
+
−
By assumption, e0 , e1 ∈ A, and so if w + w ∈ A, closure under the coproduct
requires that also w+ − w− ∈ A. We may therefore pick two subspaces V ± ⊂ W ±
and define A = A(V + , V − ) ⊂ Q to be the unital subalgebra generated by elements in
V + ⊕ V − and by K. A quick look at the explicit expressions in Section 5.1.1 confirms
that the coproduct and antipode restrict to A, and that α, β ∈ A and Φ±1 ∈ A⊗3 .
The pivot g from (5.9) is also contained in A. However, the R-matrix does not restrict
to A (unless A = Q).
If the restricted symplectic form on V + ⊕ V − is non-degenerate, A is isomorphic as
an algebra to Q(N ′ , β ′ ) with N ′ = dim V ± and β ′ arbitrary. The isomorphism maps
K 7→ K and takes a symplectic basis of V + ⊕ V − to the generators fi± of Q(N ′ , β ′ ).
From the expressions in Section 5.1.1 one sees that this defines an isomorphism of
quasi-Hopf algebras iff N ′ ≡ N (mod 2) and β 2 = β ′2 .
The projective cover P0 (A) of the trivial A-module C (with K acting as 1) is given by
dim V + +dim V −
Ae+
.
0 , cf. (5.14). The socle of P0 (A) is one-dimensional and K acts as (−1)
+
−
Thus A is unimodular iff dim V + dim V is even.
Remark 5.4. We note that by (5.20), any element w ∈ W+ ⊕ W− , together with K,
generates a coideal subalgebra in Q = Q(N, β). More generally, K and any subspace
V ⊂ W+ ⊕W− generate a coideal subalgebra IV ⊂ Q. Therefore, following Remark 4.8
we have a family of two-sided tensor ideals in Q M parametrised by the subspaces V

50

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

and a choice of module M ∈ IV M, possibly with a modified trace on them.16 It is
a very interesting problem to classify such modified traces for a given subspace V of
the symplectic space W+ ⊕ W− but this is out of the scope of the current paper. △
Altogether we see that each such choice of a unimodular quasi-Hopf subalgebra A
gives a tensor ideal with modified trace via pull-back, recall Corollary 4.6. We have
thus a continuum of intermediate tensor ideals in Q M, but here we will study just
one of them.
Namely, the example we study in detail now is
V ± = Cf1± ,

A = A(V + , V − ) ⊂ Q(2, β) =: H

where β is any choice of 4th root of unity.
5.3.2. Lifts of projective modules of A. As an algebra (but not as a quasi-Hopf algebra), A agrees with one pair of symplectic fermions Q(1, β); in particular, we know
its projective modules.
Let P0+ (A) be the projective cover of the tensor unit of A M, and similarly let
−
P0 (A), X1+ (A), X1− (A) the remaining indecomposable projectives. If we refer to the
projectives in H M, we will write P0± (H) and X1± (H) instead. The A-module P0+ (A)
is four-dimensional and is generated by a vector v0 which has K-eigenvalue 1. We set
v1± = f1± .v0 and v2= f1+ f1− .v0 . The K-eigenvalue of v2 is 1, while those of v1± are −1.
− +
Let µ = ab− ab+ ∈ Mat2 (C). On P0+ (A), we define the actions of f2± ∈ H as
f2ε = aε f1− + bε f1+ ∈ Endk (P0+ (A)),

ε=±.

(5.21)

It is not hard to verify that with this we indeed obtain an H-module structure on
P0+ (A), and we shall denote it by Pµ ∈ H M. By construction, Pµ is a lift of P0+ (A)
and we will now show that these are in fact all lifts:
Proposition 5.5. Every lift of P0+ (A) to H M is of the form Pµ for some µ ∈
Mat2 (C). Moreover, Pµ ∼
= Pµ′ in H M iff µ = µ′ .
Proof. To lift the A-module structure, we classify all possible f2± -actions on P0+ (A).
This is a linear algebra problem: the algebra relations (in particular the anticommutators) of H have to be satisfied by the matrices representing the actions of generators.
In the basis {v0 , v1− , v1+ , v2 } of P0+ (A), the action of the A-generators K, f1− , and f1+ is
given by
K=

1 0 0 0
0 −1 0 0
0 0 −1 0
0 0 0 1

!

,

f1− =

0 0 0 0
1 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0

,

and f1+ =

0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0
1 0 0 0
0 −1 0 0

,

respectively. The only matrices that anticommute with these are of the form
Ea,b =

0 0 0 0
a 0 0 0
b 0 0 0
0 −b a 0

!

= a f1− + b f1+ ,

a, b ∈ C .

The matrices Ea,b anticommute with Ec,d for any four complex numbers a, b, c, d. In
particular, given (a− , a+ , b− , b+ ) ∈ C4 , we get a H-module on which the action of f2±
is represented by a± , b± as in (5.21). By construction these are all possible lifts.
16We thank the anonymous referee for pointing out this more general construction.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

 −

51



Now we show that these are pairwise non-isomorphic. Let µ = ab− ab+ and µ′ =
 − +
c c
∼
− + , and suppose Pµ = Pµ′ . This isomorphism must come from an invertible
d

+

d

endomorphism of P0+ (A) intertwining the A-action, so is necessarily given by the
action with ξx,y = x1 + yf1− f1+ , where x, y ∈ C with x ̸= 0. Requiring ξx,y to
intertwine the f2ε -actions on Pµ and Pµ′ forces aε = cε and bε = dε , for ε = +, −.
Hence, µ = µ′ .
□
The following simple corollary to the proof of the above proposition will be useful
later.
Corollary 5.6. The element f2+ f2− ∈ H acts on Pµ as det µ · f1+ f1− , and consequently
+ −
+ −
j=1 (1 − xfj fj ) acts as 1 − x(1 + det µ)f1 f1 for any x ∈ C.

Q2

Remark 5.7. By contrast, the simple projective modules of A do not admit lifts,
because their dimensions are too small: the grade 1 part of A -Proj(H M) has to
coincide with the grade 1 part of H M by Remark 2.5. Instead, a suitable direct sum
of simple A-projectives lifts to each of the two simple projective of H, and so no
continuum of parameters is involved.
△
5.3.3. Symmetrised cointegrals of A. Next, we describe the left and the right symmetrised cointegral of A, which by [BGR1, Thm. 1.1] correspond precisely to the left
and the right modified trace on Proj(A M).
Proposition 5.8. A symmetrised right resp. left cointegral for A is given by




2
b A,r f + f − Km = δ
λ
m,1 − iβ δm,3
1 1





2
b A,l f + f − Km = δ
resp. λ
m,1 + iβ δm,3 , ,
1 1

and by 0 on all other basis vectors. The left and the right modified trace tA,l and tA,r
on Proj(A M) corresponding to the cointegrals
• are proportional on the grade 0 part and the grade 1 part of Proj(A M) separately, but
• are not proportional on all of Proj(A M).
The final statement implies that the pivotal quasi-Hopf algebra A cannot be made
ribbon, or equivalently, that the pivotal structure on A M cannot be extended to a
ribbon structure.
Proof. We start by computing the right symmetrised cointegral. Since A is pivotal
and unimodular, this can be done by solving (4.11). Using the explicit formulas for
q R , pR from (5.4), (4.11) becomes
b A,r (h)1 = λ
b A,r (h )ge h + λ
b A,r (e h )ge h β + λ
b A,r (e h )ge βh
λ
0 (2)
0 (1)
1 (2)
1 (1)
1
(1)
(2) .

Abbreviate hm = f1+ f1− Km , and note that
∆(hm ) ≈ hm ⊗ e0 Km + hm K2δm,odd ⊗ e1 Km ,
where ≈ means that we disregard terms that have fewer than all fs in the first tensor
b A,r (f + f − Km ) = c ∈ C and zero otherwise. Clearly
factor. We then make the ansatz λ
m
1 1

52

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

this satisfies (4.11) for any h not of the form hm . Using the explicit expression (5.9)
for g and the fact that [β, K] = 0, the cointegral equation (4.11) for h = hm becomes
b A,r ((h ) ) · e (h ) K − iβ 2 λ
b A,r ((h ) ) · e (h ) K
cm · 1 = λ
m (1)
0 m (2)
m (1)
1 m (2)

= cm e0 Km+1 − iβ 2 cm+2δm,odd e1 Km+1 .
Immediately this implies c0 = c2 = 0, so we are only left with the two equations
c1 · 1 = c1 e0 + iβ 2 c3 e1

and c3 · 1 = c3 e0 − iβ 2 c1 e1 ,

b A,r can be chosen as in the statement of this
which imply c3 = −iβ 2 c1 , so that λ
proposition.
b A,r ◦ S −1 , see [BGR1, Sec. 3]. That is,
A left symmetrised cointegral is given by λ
A,l
b
up to a scalar λ is completely determined as
2
2
2
b A,r ◦ S −1 )(f + f − Km ) = δ
(λ
m,3 − iβ δm,1 = −iβ (δm,1 + iβ δm,3 ) ,
1 1

b A,l = λ
b A,r ◦ S −1 , which yields λ
b A,l as in the statement.
and we choose −iβ 2 λ
We will now show that the associated modified traces are proportional on the
degree 0 and the degree 1 component separately, but not simultaneously. Let us
2
b A,− := λ
b A,r and λ
b A,+ := λ
b A,l , so that λ
b A,± (Km f + f − ) = δ
write λ
m,1 ± iβ δm,3 .
1 1
±
The endomorphism space of P0 (A) has as basis the identity and the map given by
b A,± on e± and e± f + f − . Clearly,
acting with f1+ f1− , and hence we need to evaluate λ
0
0 1 1
±
the value on e0 is zero. One easily computes
b A,± (eε f + f − ) = 1
λ
0 1 1
4

3
X

b ±,A (Km f + f − ) = ε
εm λ
1 1

m=0

1 ± iβ 2
.
4

(5.22)

In the degree 1 component, indecomposable projectives only have the identity endomorphism. Using additivity of the modified trace, it is enough to compute its value
±
±
on the identity endomorphism (−) · e±
1 of 2X1 (A) ⊂ A (the image of e1 is given
above (5.15)). We have
b ±,A (eε ) = εiλ
b ±,A (e Kf + f − ) = εi
λ
1
1
1 1

1 ∓ iβ 2
.
2

Since β 4 = 1, (1 − iβ 2 )iβ 2 = 1 + iβ 2 . Thus for all P ∈ Proj(A M)
2 A,l
tA,r
e0 P = −iβ te0 P

2 A,l
and tA,r
e1 P = iβ te1 P ,

and so the two traces are not proportional.

□

5.3.4. Pullback modified traces from A. The modified traces on A -Proj(H M) obtained via pullback (Proposition 2.11 and Corollary 4.6) from the modified traces in
Proposition 5.8 are not non-degenerate. Namely, we have:
Proposition 5.9. The pullback modified traces vanish on projective H-modules:
Res∗ (tA,r )

Proj(H M)

≡0

and

Res∗ (tA,l )

Proj(H M)

≡0.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

53

Proof. We use the suggestive notation C1|0 and C0|1 for the one-dimensional simple
modules of both A and H, on which K acts as 1 and −1, respectively, and on which
the actions of the fj± vanish. Similarly we write Cn|m = nC1|0 ⊕ mC0|1 . We have
trA,r
(f ⊗ id) = 0 for any V ∈ A M and f ∈ EndA (V ), where trA,r is the right
V ⊗Cn|n
partial trace of A M. Indeed, this follows from
Vect
trA
(K) = 1 and
C1|0 (id) = trC

see (4.10). It is not hard to verify that
Res(X ± (H)) ∼
= X + (A) ⊗ C1|1 and
1

1

trA
C0|1 (id) = −1 ,

Res(P0± (H)) ∼
= P0+ (A) ⊗ C2|2

(5.23)

as A-modules. Thus for any projective indecomposable P ∈ Proj(H M) and any
f ∈ EndH (P ) we have e.g.




A,r
′
Res∗ (tA,r )P (f ) = tA
P ′ trP ′ ⊗Cn|n (f ) ,

where P ′ is X1+ (A) or P0+ (A), n is 1 or 2, and f ′ is f conjugated by one of the
isomorphisms in (5.23). Our goal is therefore now to show that in all situations f ′
will be a sum of terms of the form g ⊗ h, with h : Cn|n → Cn|n of trace zero.
For the odd sector, i.e. P = X1± (H), this is obvious since EndH (X1± (H)) is onedimensional, and so h is a multiple of id.
For P = P0± (H), we note first that an explicit basis of the 8-dimensional space
EndH (P0± (H)) is given by acting with the elements
1,

f1+ f1− ,

f1+ f2+ ,

f1+ f2− ,

f1− f2+ ,

f1− f2− ,

f2+ f2− ,

f1+ f1− f2+ f2− ,

which are central on the even sector. Let us denote the second isomorphism in (5.23)
by ϕ. Explicitly, a basis of P0± (H) is given by
n

o

(f1+ )a (f1− )b (f2+ )c (f2− )d e±
0 a, b, c, d ∈ Z2 ,

see [FGR2, Sec. 3.7]. A basis of P0± (A) is obtained by just using f1± . If we denote a
basis of C2|2 by {(f2+ )c (f2− )d |c, d ∈ Z2 }, then ϕ is simply given by
+ a − b ±
+ c − d
(f1+ )a (f1− )b (f2+ )c (f2− )d e±
0 7−→ (f1 ) (f1 ) e0 ⊗ (f2 ) (f2 ) ,

and it commutes with the action of f1± . One can now verify that the transported
actions ϕ ◦ (f2± .(−)) ◦ ϕ−1 and ϕ ◦ (f2+ f2− .(−)) ◦ ϕ−1 are of the form g ⊗ h with nilpotent
h (which hence has trace zero).
□
Corollary 5.10. The pullback traces Res∗ (tA,r ) and Res∗ (tA,l ) are proportional.
Proof. By Remark 2.5, the degree 1 component of A -Proj(H M) equals the degree 1
component of Proj(H M). Thus both pullback traces vanish on (A -Proj(H M))1 by
Proposition 5.9. By Proposition 5.8, tA,r and tA,l are proportional on the degree 0
component of Proj(A M).
□
To make things more readable we choose a specific normalisation and set
4
4
Res∗ (tA ) :=
Res∗ (tA,r ) =
Res∗ (tA,l ) ,
2
2
1 − iβ
1 + iβ
which is well-defined since β 2 = ±1.

(5.24)

54

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

Since by Theorem 2.13 we are free to choose which I-labelled edge of a closed ribbon
graph T to cut when computing FC,′ t (T ), as another consequence from Proposition 5.9
we get:
Corollary 5.11. Let T be an I-admissible closed ribbon graph and t = Res∗ (tA ). If
at least one edge of T is coloured by a projective H-module, then FC,′ t (T ) = 0.
6. Explicit computations of link invariants
In this section we provide the details on how to obtain the link invariants presented
in Table 1. We consider the n-framed unknot, the a, b-framed Hopf link, and the
(2, m)-torus knot, each for three choices of ideal in Q M.
Throughout this section we will often write ε, δ, etc. for multiple disjoint occurrences of ±.
6.1. Framed unknot. Recall the ribbon twist from (5.8). One shows via induction
that
v ±m = (e0 + (−β ±1 iK)m e1 )

N 
Y

1 ∓ 2(me0 ± δm,odd e1 )fj+ fj−



j=1

holds for natural m ≥ 0. By convention, the ribbon twist is given by acting with v −1 ,
and so the n-framed unknot corresponds to the trace of v −n , for n ∈ Z.
Categorical trace. The categorical trace of the projective module X1± vanishes, and it
is clear that v acts as the identity on X0± since the f’s act trivially. Thus, for n ∈ Z,
M

trQX ± (v n ) = trX ± (gβS(α)) = trX ± (K) = ±1 ,
0

0

0

as claimed in Table 1.
The modified trace on the projective ideal. For the modified trace on the projective
ideal, we find on the even sector that the invariant of the n-framed unknot (n ∈ Z)
coloured with P0ε is given by


b r (v −n eε ) = (2n)N λ
b r eε
tP0ε (v −n ) = λ
0
0

N
Y

 (∗)

fj+ fj− = nN 21 εβ −2 .

j=1

In step (∗) we used


b r eε
λ
0

N
Y
j=1

fj+ fj−

3
 (5.14) 1 X

=

4 m=0

b r (Km
εm λ

N
Y
j=1

(5.13) 1

fj+ fj− ) =

(5.10) 2

εβ 2 (−1)N 2−N

= 2−N −1 εβ −2 .

(6.1)

On the odd sector, indecomposable projectives are simple and therefore have onedimensional endomorphism spaces. It was shown in [FGR2, Lem. 3.14] that v ±1 eε1 =
εβ ±1 eε1 (where eε1 was given in (5.15)), so that for integer powers we have v −n eε1 =
(εβ)−n eε1 . The invariant of the n-framed unknot coloured by X1± is then given by
b r (eε ) .
tX1ε (v −n ) = 2−N t2N X1ε (v −n ) = 2−N (εβ)−n t2N X1ε (id) = 2−N (εβ)−n λ
1

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

55

We find
N


Y
+ −
b r (eε ) = −ε 1 i(−2)N λ
br e K
λ
f
f
1
1
j j
2
j=1

1
1
1
= −ε i(−2)N ct (β 2 + i − β 2 − i3 ) = ε ,
2
2
2
where ct is the constant from (5.13).

(6.2)

Pullback trace. For the pullback trace, we restrict ourselves to the situation worked
out in Section 5.3.4, i.e. to the pullback trace obtained from A ⊂ H = Q(2, β). We
first use Corollary 5.6 to rewrite the action of v −n on Pµ as, for u ∈ Pµ ,
v −n .u =

2 
Y







1 + 2nfj+ fj− .u = 1 + 2n(1 + det µ)f1+ f1− .u .

j=1

Thus for n ∈ Z the invariant of the n-framed unknot coloured by Pµ is given by
Res∗ (tA )Pµ (v −n ) = 2n(1 + det µ)

4
(f1+ f1− ) = 2n(1 + det µ) ,
tA,r
+
2
(A)
P
0
1 − iβ

where we used (4.13) and (5.22) to see that in terms of the symmetrised cointegral
for A,
b A,r (e+ f + f − ) = (1 − iβ 2 )/4
(f + f − ) = λ
tA,r
0 1 1
P + (A) 1 1
0

(6.3)

6.2. Framed Hopf link. We compute the Hopf link invariants S(X, n; U, m) coloured
with X ∈ I and U ∈ Irr(C), and with n-fold twist on X and m-fold twist on U . Since
we can take U to be irreducible, the twist amounts to an overall factor times the invariant of S(X, n; U, 0). For the latter we need to compute the trace tX (v −n SC (ϕU )X )
of the (−n)’th power of the ribbon element (5.8) composed with the open Hopf link
operator given in (3.12). We saw in Section 5.2.2 that SC (ϕU )X is given by multiplication with the central element χU from (5.19).
Categorical trace. For I = C, the only thing to compute is the invariant of S(X0ε , n; X0δ , m).
But with respect to the grade 0 part of Q M, X0± is transparent (see Remark 5.1) and
has trivial twist, therefore we just obtain the product of the categorical dimensions
of the simple objects.
Modified trace on projective ideal. We first note that since X1δ is simple, the mfold twist is given by multiplying with an overall factor, which in this case is given
by (δβ −1 )m as explained below (6.1). Alternatively, one can directly use the twist
eigenvalue given in [FGR2, Sec. 2.6].
We start by computing S(P, n; U, m) for U = X0± . If P is in the grade 0 part of
±
Q M, we use that X0 is transparent relative to P and has trivial twist, resulting in
the quantum dimension ±1 of X0± times the invariant of the n-framed P -coloured
unknot already computed in Section 6.1:
S(P0ε , n; X0δ , m) :

εδ N −2
n β .
2

56

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

On the other hand, for P = 2N X1ε we first compute the zero-framed invariant,
S(2N X1ε , 0; X0δ , 0) :

(6.2) 1
ε,
2

b r (eε ) =
t2N X1ε (SC (ϕX0δ )2N X1ε ) = λ
1

and by linearity the invariant of S(X1ε , 0; X0δ , 0) is then equal to ε2−N −1 . Using the
twist eigenvalue for X1ε and the fact that X0± has trivial twist, we get
S(X1ε , n; X0δ , m) : ε2−N −1 (εβ −1 )n .
Next we compute S(P, n; U, m) for U = X1δ . For the zero-framed Hopf link we have
S(2N X1ε , 0; X1δ , 0) :

b r ((e+ − e− )eε )
t2N X1ε (SC (ϕX1δ )2N X1ε ) = 2N λ
1
1
1
b r (eε ) = 2N −1 ,
= 2N ελ
1

whence the invariant of S(X1ε , n; X1δ , m) is 2−1 (εβ −1 )n (δβ −1 )m .
Finally,
S(P0ε , n; X1δ , 0) :

(5.19)

b r (v −n eε K
tP0ε (v −n SC (ϕX1δ )P0ε ) = δβ 2 4N λ
0

N
Y

(∗)

fj+ fj− ) = δ2N −1 ,

j=1

where the calculation for (∗) is as in (6.1), up to an overall factor of ε, together with
the observation that from the ribbon element (5.8) only e0 contributes, which acts
as one on eε0 . Thus we arrive at
S(P0ε , n; X1δ , m) : δ2N −1 (δβ −1 )m .
Pullback trace. The next remark shows that the invariant of S(Pµ , n; X0± , m) is ±1
times that of the framed unknot O(n, Pµ ), while the invariant of S(Pµ , n; X1± , m) is
zero.
Remark 6.1. Consider any link L with (at least) one of its components coloured
by Pµ . In this situation the symplectic fermion example is somewhat special in the
following sense. By Corollary 3.8 it is enough to consider the case where the other
components are labelled by simple objects. If any component is labelled by X1± , we
can use that X1± is in the pullback ideal. So we may as well compute the invariant via
the pullback trace on the appropriate endomorphism of X1± . But by Proposition 5.9,
the pullback trace vanishes on projective modules of the larger algebra. Hence to get
a non-zero invariant, all other link components have to be decorated by X0± . But
these objects are transparent in the degree 0 (see Remark 5.1), and so just result in
overall factors of ±1. Altogether, the invariant of L is given by the invariant of the
Pµ -coloured component times the product of the quantum dimensions of the colours
of the other components.
△
6.3. Torus knot. The torus knot T (m, X) for m ∈ 2Z + 1 is the braid closure of m
braidings. Cutting open one strand results in the endomorphism (ξm )X of X, defined
as (omitting all tensor products):
∼

h

coev
g

α−1

1

X
(ξm )X := X −
→ 1X −−−X−−→
(X ∨ X)X −−→ X ∨ (XX)

|

{z

=:F

}

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS
1X ∨ cm
X,X

ev

α

1

57

∼

i

X
−−−−−→ X ∨ (XX) −
→ (X ∨ X)X −−X−−→
1X −
→X .

{z

|

=:G

(6.4)

}

Note that ξm defines a natural isomorphism of the identity functor and is therefore
given by the action of a central element of the quasi-Hopf algebra, which by abuse
of notation we also call ξm , i.e. (ξm )X = ξm .(−). To compute ξm in terms of the
quasi-Hopf algebra data in (4.4), (4.6) and (4.9), first note that the maps F and G
in (6.4) read
F : u 7→

dim
XX

v i ⊗ pL1 g −1 .vi ⊗ pL2 .u ,

G : w∗ ⊗ u ⊗ v 7→ ⟨w∗ | q1L .u⟩ q2L .v ,

i=1

where {vi } is a basis of X and {v i } the dual basis of X ∨ . For the explicit computation
it will be convenient to distinguish m > 0 and m < 0. Namely, write |m| = 2n + 1
and for m > 0 set ξn+ := ξ2n+1 and for m < 0 set ξn− := ξ−(2n+1) . Then, explicitly,
ξn+ = q2L R1 (Mn )1 pL1 g −1 q1L R2 (Mn )2 pL2 ,
n

(6.5)

n

ξn− = q2L (M )2 R2 pL1 g −1 q1L (M )1 R1 pL2 ,
where R and M are the multiplicative inverses of R and M.
Categorical trace. Let us start with I = C. Using the explicit formulas for the
braiding and its inverse, one immediately sees that R and R act as ±1⊗1 on X0± ⊗X0± .
M
Since on X0± also g acts as ±1, we find that ξn± acts as 1, and so trQX ± (ξn± ) =
QM
X0±

tr

0

(id) = ±1 as claimed in Table 1.

Modified trace on projective ideal. On the projective ideal, we used Mathematica to
compute ξn± for small values of n and N , and then interpolated a (conjectural) general
formula from that. Explicitly, we did the following, splitting the problem into odd
and even sector.
Q
+ sj − tj
On the even sector, the endomorphism spaces of P0± have basis N
j=1 (fj ) (fj )
with s, t ∈ ZN
2 such that |s| + |t| is even. After multiplying with e0 (which acts as
±
id on P0 ), these elements are central [FGR2, Prop. 3.15] and the endomorphism is
given by acting with them. The modified trace only sees the top component, i.e. the
coefficient of the basis vector with all sj and tj equal to 1. Thus, to compute the
link invariant of T (m, P0ε ), it is enough to extract the top component of the element
ξm eε0 . Small values – more precisely, N = 1 for 0 ≤ n ≤ 10, N = 2 for 0 ≤ n ≤ 5,
and N = 3 for n = 0, 1 – suggest the following general formula
N
Y
±
N
ξn Top component, = (±2(2n + 1)) e0
fj+ fj− ,
ε
acting on P0
j=1

and from this one computes
t (ξm ) = (2m)
P0ε

λ (eε0

N br

N
Y
j=1

(6.1)

fj+ fj− ) = εmN 12 β −2 .

58

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

On the odd sector, projective modules are simple and thus ξn± act as scalars. Small
values (N = 1 for 0 ≤ n ≤ 10, and N = 2 for 0 ≤ n ≤ 5) suggest the following
general formula
ξn±

acting on X1ε

= ε(2n + 1)N β ±(2n−1) = εmN β m−2 ,

where we used m = ±(2n + 1) and (±1)N = β ±2−2 . From this one computes
(6.2)

b r (eε ) = 2−N −1 mN β m−2 .
tX1ε (ξm ) = 2−N εmN β m−2 λ
1

Pullback trace. Let Pµ be the lift of P0+ (A) defined in Section 5.3.2. We introduce a
shorthand notation, which will allow for more compact statements and computations.
For any X ∈ Q, u ∈ Pµ , consider the maps ρ1,2
X,u : Q ⊗ Q → Pµ ,
ρ1X,u (E ⊗ F ) = EXF.u ,

ρ2X,u (E ⊗ F ) = F XE.u .

For two elements A, B ∈ Q ⊗ Q we will write
def.

A ≈ B ⇐⇒ ρaX,u (A) = ρaX,u (B) for all X, µ, u and a = 1, 2 .
A helpful lemma, which is not hard to verify, is the following.
Lemma 6.2. We have
2
Y

(x1 ⊗ 1 + yfj− ω± ⊗ fj+ ) ≈ x2 1 ⊗ 1 + xy(1 + a− b+ )f1− K ⊗ f1+

j=1

+ xya+ b− f1+ K ⊗ f1−
Let us first compute ξn+ from (6.5). Using the formula for the R-matrix from
Section 5.1.2, one finds:
Lemma 6.3. We have
R≈

X



(−1)rs 12 Kr ⊗ Ks + (1 + a− b+ )Kr+1 f1− ⊗ Ks f1+ + a+ b− Kr+1 f1+ ⊗ Ks f1−



r,s∈Z2

and for n ∈ N
Mn ≈ 1 ⊗ 1 + 2n(1 + det µ)Kf1− ⊗ f1+ − 2n(1 + det µ)Kf1+ ⊗ f1− .
Proof. We have
R = 12



β 2nm (−1)rs i−rn+sm Kr en ⊗ Ks em

X

≈

2

(−1)rs Kr ⊗ Ks

(1 ⊗ 1 − 2fj− ω− ⊗ fj+ )

j=1

n,m,r,s∈Z2
Lem. 6.2 1  X

2
Y



1 ⊗ 1 − 2(1 + a− b+ )f1− K ⊗ f1+ − 2a+ b− f1+ K ⊗ f1−

r,s∈Z2

=

X



(−1)rs 12 Kr ⊗ Ks + (1 + a− b+ )Kr+1 f1− ⊗ Ks f1+ + a+ b− Kr+1 f1+ ⊗ Ks f1−

r,s∈Z2

Thus
M = R21 R





NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS



(−1)rs 12 Ks ⊗ Kr + (1 + a− b+ )Ks f1+ ⊗ Kr+1 f1− + a+ b− Ks f1− ⊗ Kr+1 f1+

X

≈

59



r,s∈Z2

×



(−1)mn 12 Km ⊗ Kn + (1 + a− b+ )Km+1 f1− ⊗ Kn f1+ + a+ b− Km+1 f1+ ⊗ Kn f1−

X



m,n∈Z2

"

= 21



(−1)rs+mn Km+s ⊗ Kn+r 12 1 ⊗ 1 + (1 + a− b+ )Kf1− ⊗ f1+

X
r,s,m,n∈Z2





+ a+ b− Kf1+ ⊗ f1− + (−1)m+n Ks+m ⊗ Kn+r (1 + a− b+ )f1+ ⊗ Kf1−
+ a+ b− f1− ⊗ Kf1+



#

One can show that
(−1)rs+mn Km+s ⊗ Kn+r = 4e0 ⊗ e0

X

e0 ⊗ e 0 ·

r,s,m,n∈Z2

and
(−1)rs+mn+m+n Km+s ⊗ Kn+r = −4e0 K ⊗ e0 K ,

X

e0 ⊗ e0 ·

r,s,m,n∈Z2

whence
"

M≈2



1
1 ⊗ 1 + (1 + a− b+ )Kf1− ⊗ f1+ + a+ b− Kf1+ ⊗ f1−
2



− K ⊗ K (1 + a b

− +

)f1+ ⊗ Kf1− + a+ b− f1− ⊗ Kf1+





#

= 1 ⊗ 1 + 2(1 + det µ)Kf1− ⊗ f1+ − 2(1 + det µ)Kf1+ ⊗ f1−
The expression for Mn from the statement now follows by induction.

□

Lemma 6.4. For n ∈ N we have


Res∗ (tA )Pµ ξn+





= 2(2n + 1)(1 + det µ) Res∗ (tA )Pµ f1+ f1−



Proof. We first compute RMn using Lemma 6.3:
RMn ≈

X



(−1)rs 12 Kr ⊗ Ks + (1 + a− b+ )Kr+1 f1− ⊗ Ks f1+

r,s∈Z2





+ a+ b− Kr+1 f1+ ⊗ Ks f1− × 1 ⊗ 1 + 2n(1 + det µ)Kf1− ⊗ f1+
− 2n(1 + det µ)Kf1+ ⊗ f1−
≈

X

(−1)rs ×





1 r
K ⊗ Ks + (n(1 + det µ) + 1 + a− b+ )Kr+1 f1− ⊗ Ks f1+
2

r,s∈Z2



− (n(1 + det µ) − a+ b− )Kr+1 f1+ ⊗ Ks f1− .
By definition in (6.5), ξn+ = q2L R1 (Mn )1 pL1 g −1 q1L R2 (Mn )2 pL2 , and since we will evaluate
+
the right symmetrised cointegral of the smaller algebra A on e+
0 ξn , we see that we
r
s
can also disregard the K ⊗ K terms in the above expression for RMn . Indeed, for

60

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

these terms, no f’s will appear in ξn+ e+
0 , and so these terms don’t contribute to the
final result.
Note now that on the tensor product of even sectors, pL and q L from (5.4) act as
the identity, and also e0 g = e0 K. Thus, abbreviating T(X) = Res∗ (tA )Pµ (X), we get


T(ξn+ ) = T R1 (Mn )1 KR2 (Mn )2
=

X





(−1)rs T (n(1 + det µ) + 1 + a− b+ )Kr+1 f1− KKs f1+

r,s∈Z2

− (n(1 + det µ) − a+ b− )Kr+1 f1+ KKs f1−
=

X







(−1)rs+s (2n + 1)(1 + det µ)T Kr+s f1+ f1− .

r,s∈Z2

Noticing e0

rs+s r+s
K
= 2e0 , the claim follows.
r,s∈Z2 (−1)

P

□

As a result of all of the computations, we finally find that the A -Proj(Q M)-based
invariant of the Pµ -coloured torus knot T (2n + 1, Pµ ) is
4
(5.24)
Res∗ (tA )Pµ (ξn+ ) = 2(2n + 1)(1 + det µ)
tA,r+ (f + f − )
1 − iβ 2 P0 (A) 1 1
(6.3)

= 2(2n + 1)(1 + det µ) .

Completely analogous computations for the inverse braiding and the associated
monodromy show that Res∗ (tA )Pµ (ξn− ) = − Res∗ (tA )Pµ (ξn+ ).
7. Lens space invariants for symplectic fermions
In order to do the computation, we will first make some observations which simplify
the problem and do not depend on the specific case of symplectic fermions, and then
we proceed with the actual computation.
7.1. Lens space invariants for quasi-Hopf algebras. Here we will rewrite the
categorical expression in Proposition 3.16 in the case C = H M for a unimodular and
twist-nondegenerate (recall (4.16)) ribbon quasi-Hopf algebra H.
We start with the morphism f (a) : 1 → L from (3.22). Recall from (3.8) the
isomorphism ρ ◦ ψ : End(idC ) → C(1, L). The natural endomorphisms of the identity
functor are in bijection (as an algebra) with the centre of H. If we call this last
bijection ξ, then altogether
ξ

ρ◦ψ

Z(H) −→ End(idC ) −−−→ C(1, L) .

(7.1)

In (3.9) we transported the endomorphisms SL ◦ (−), TL ◦ (−) of C(1, L) to endomorphisms SC , TC of End(idC ). We denote their further transport to Z(H) by SZ and
TZ . Explicit expressions for SZ , TZ : Z(H) → Z(H) in terms of quasi-Hopf data can
be found in [FGR1, Thm. 8.1].17 For example, TZ (z) = v −1 .z, while the expression
for SZ is more involved. As noted in Remark 3.2 (3), for an H-module V we set
17The formulas in [FGR1] were computed in the factorisable case. However, the same computation

also works without assuming factorisability, resulting in the same expressions for the endomorphisms
SZ and TZ of Z(H). But they do not give a projective SL(2, Z)-action unless H is factorisable.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

61

ϕV = (ρ ◦ ψ)−1 (χV ), and we have χ1 = ηL . We denote ϕV := ξ −1 (ϕV ) ∈ Z(H), so
that (7.1) maps
(7.2)

ϕV 7−→ ϕV 7−→ χV .

See [FGR1, Sec. 7.6] for an explicit quasi-Hopf algebra formula for ϕV .
Let us write fd
(a) := (ρ ◦ ψ ◦ ξ)−1 (f (a)) ∈ Z(H). Using the above notation, we
obtain
fd
(a) =

1
Y



TZai ◦ SZ (ϕ1 ) .

(7.3)

i=n

Given a tensor ideal I ⊂ C, a modified trace t on I and an object P ∈ I, we obtain
a (possibly degenerate) symmetric and invariant bilinear form on Z(H) via
(z, z ′ )P = tP (zz ′ ) .

(7.4)

We can now reformulate the categorical expressions from Proposition 3.16 as follows:
Proposition 7.1. In terms of quasi-Hopf data, the invariants of Lx (α, P ), x ∈ {∗, ◦}
from Proposition 3.16 read
b ζx )P
L′Λ, t (Lx (α, P )) = δ −σ D −1−n (α,
b ∈ Z(H) represents the natural transformation α of the identity functor and
where α

ζ∗ = ⟨Λ|αfd
(a)⟩ · 1 ,
ζ◦ = ⟨Λ|S(Φ1 Ψ1 )αfd
(a)Φ2 M1 Ψ2 ⟩ · Φ3 M2 Ψ3 .
Here, Λ ∈ H ∗ is the integral of L, see Section 4.3.
Proof. Let z ∈ Z(H) and define E(z) : L → L by E(z) ◦ jX = jX ◦ (id ⊗ξ(z)X ). The
dinatural transformation jX : X ∗ ⊗ X → L of L is explicitly given in (4.14). From
this it is easy to check that for f ∈ L = H ∗ we have E(z)(f ) = f ((−) · z).
Using the definition of the coproduct ∆L (see [FGR1, Sec. 3.3]), one can verify the
identity (E(z) ⊗ id) ◦ ∆L = (id ⊗E(z)) ◦ ∆L .
The morphism g := ψ(ξ(z)) ∈ C(L, 1) = H ∗∗ is defined by the dinatural transformation g ◦ jX = evX ◦(id ⊗ξ(z)X ). Comparing to the definition of the counit
εL and to that of E(z) above, we get ψ(ξ(z)) = εL ◦ E(z). The isomorphism
ρ : C(L, 1) → C(1, L) acts on g as [GR3, Sec. 2]
h

Λ

∆

g⊗id

∼

i

L
ρ(g) = 1 −−→ L −−−
→ LL −−−−→ 1L −−→ L .

But (g ⊗ id) ◦ ∆L = (εL ⊗ id) ◦ (E(z) ⊗ id) ◦ ∆L = (εL ⊗ E(z)) ◦ ∆L . Hence altogether
ρ(ψ(ξ(z))) = E(z) ◦ Λ = ⟨Λ|(−) · z⟩ .

(7.5)

After these preparations, we can compute ζ∗ and ζ◦ :
ζ∗ : We have
(7.5)

εL ◦ f (a) = εL ◦ E(fd
(a)) ◦ Λ = ⟨Λ|αfd
(a)⟩ ,

(7.6)

where the last equality follows from the explicit form of εL ∈ C(L, 1) = H ∗∗ ,
which acts by evaluating an element of H ∗ on α (see [FGR1, Sec. 3.3]).

62

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

ζ◦ : We need to compute tP (αP ◦ QP ◦ (f (a) ⊗ idP )), where Q : L ⊗ idC ⇒ idC is
the natural transformation defined in (3.23). It is not hard to see that the
action of QV : L ⊗ V → V on f ⊗ v ∈ L ⊗ V is given by
QV (f ⊗ v) = ⟨f |S(Φ1 Ψ1 )αΦ2 M1 Ψ2 ⟩ · Φ3 M2 Ψ3 .v .

(7.7)

Substituting f = f (a) = E(fd
(a)) ◦ Λ = ⟨Λ|(−) · fd
(a)⟩ and using that fd
(a) is
central gives the expressions as in the statement of the proposition.
□
7.2. The central element fd
(a) for symplectic fermions. After rewriting the
lens space invariants for a general unimodular and twist-nondegenerate ribbon quasiHopf algebra in Proposition 7.1, in this section we specialise to the symplectic fermion
quasi-Hopf algebra H = Q(N, β), and we will work out the elements fd
(a) introduced
in (7.3).
Recall from (5.12) our normalisation of the integral Λ : 1 → L in C = H M,
Λ = β 6 2−(N −1) TOP∗ ,
where we abbreviated
TOP =

N
Y

(7.8)

fj+ fj− .

j=1

(When projected to Q0 via e0 , this is the top element of the Grassmann algebra,
hence the name.)
We will need the internal characters ϕV from (7.2) for Q(N, β). For V = X0± , X1± ,
they were given in (5.18). And since ϕV only depends on the class of V in the
Grothendieck ring, for V = P0± we have
ϕP0± = 22N −1 ϕX + + 22N −1 ϕX0− .

(7.9)

0

Recall from [FGR2, Sec. 5] that the centre Z(H) of H can be decomposed as
Z(H) = ZP ⊕ ZΛ

(7.10)

where the two summands have bases
ZP :
ZΛ :

n

ϕP + , ϕX + , ϕX1−
0




e

 0

N
Y

o

,

1




(fj+ )sj (fj− )tj | s, t ∈ ZN
2 , |s| + |t| ∈ 2Z

.

(7.11)



j=1

The dimension of the centre is dim Z(H) = dim ZP + dim ZΛ = 3 + 22N −1 .
We fix
p
= [an ; an−1 , . . . , a1 ]
q

subject to the positivity condition (3.18).
Proposition 7.2. The central element fd
(a) =
fd
(a) = fd
(a)

ZP

Q

ai
1
i=n TZ ◦ SZ

+ fd
(a)

ZΛ

,



(ϕ1 ) is given by

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

63

where
fd
(a)
fd
(a)





ZP

ZΛ

−
= 2−2N c0n ϕP + + c+
n ϕX + + cn ϕX1− ,

= 2N β 6n+2

0

1

X

 N −|s|
q

p|s|

2

s∈ZN
2

e0

N 
Y

fj+ fj−

sj

.

j=1

The coefficients c0,±
are determined recursively by
i
−
c0i = 2−N (c+
i−1 − ci−1 ) ,
1
ai −ai +
N 0
(ci−1 + c−
c±
i−1 ± 2 ci−1 ) ,
i = (±1) β
2

(7.12)

for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, with initial values c00 = 1 and c±
0 = 0.
The proof of this proposition will be given in the remainder of this subsection.
The decomposition (7.10) respects the SL(2, Z)-action on Z(H), i.e. ZP and ZΛ are
subrepresentations. The central element ϕ1 = ϕX + from (5.18) splits according to
0
the direct sum decomposition (7.10) as
ϕ1 = 2−2N ϕP + + 2N β 2 e0 TOP .

(7.13)

0

Proof of Proposition 7.2 Part 1. In the ordered basis of ZP given above, the S- and
T -generators act via the matrices (see [FGR2, Lem. 5.1])


0



N −1
SZP = 
 2


−2N −1





2−N −2−N 
1
2

1
2

1
2

1
2






1

0



0



0 

0 
 ,

−1
and TZP = 
0 β



0

−β −1



and it is not too hard to see that the coefficients in
1
Y
i=n



−
TZaPi ◦ SZP (ϕP + ) = c0n ϕP + + c+
n ϕX + + cn ϕX1− ,
0

0

1

satisfy the recursive relation given in (7.12).

□

Remark 7.3. For later use we note that the recursion relation (7.12) implies that
−
c0i ∈ {0} ∪ {β j | j ∈ Z} for all i. To see this set gi = c0i and hi = 2−N (c+
i + ci ). Then
g0 = 1, g1 = 0, h0 = 0, and the recursion now reads:


g
c+ − c −
i−2
gi = i−1 N i−1 = β −ai−1
hi−2
2



h
; ai−1 even
i−1
, hi = β −ai

; ai−1 odd
gi−1

; ai even
; ai odd

Thus the condition gi , hi ∈ {0} ∪ {β j | j ∈ Z} is satisfied by the initial conditions and
preserved by the recursion.
△
Q1
ai
To compute the action of i=n TZ ◦ SZ on e0 TOP, let 1 ≤ j ≤ N and let Zev,j
be the vector space with basis e0 fj+ fj− and e0 . We consider it as an algebra in the

64

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

obvious way. Denote by Zev the subspace of ZΛ generated (as an algebra with unit
e0 ) by e0 fj+ fj− , 1 ≤ j ≤ N . There is an algebra isomorphism
κ:

N
O

Zev,j → Zev ,

x1 ⊗ . . . ⊗ xN 7→ x1 · . . . · xN .

j=1

Then by [FGR2, Lem. 5.2], the SL(2, Z)-action on ZΛ restricts to an action on Zev ,
which can be described as
SZΛ

=κ◦ β ·
2

Zev

N
O

!

S ◦κ

and TZΛ

−1

j=1

Zev

=κ◦

N
O

!

◦ κ−1 ,

T

j=1

where S and T are the matrices


S=


0







and T = 

2

1

− 12 0



2

0 1



in our chosen basis {e0 fj+ fj− , e0 } of Zev,j for each j.
Lemma 7.4. Let b1 , . . . , bn be non-zero integers, n ≥ 1. Then
1
Y



TZbΛi ◦ SZΛ (e0 TOP)

i=n

=β

6n

Y
1 n−1
[bj ; bj−1 , . . . , b1 ]
2 j=1

!N

X 

2[bn ; bn−1 , . . . , b1 ]

|s|

e0

N 
Y

fj+ fj−

sj

(7.14)

.

j=1

s∈ZN
2

Proof. We claim first that the left hand side of (7.14) equals
(−1)N n β 2n 2−N

n−1
Y

!N N
Y

j=1

j=1

[bj ; bj−1 , . . . , b1 ]



e0 + 2[bn ; bn−1 , . . . , b1 ]e0 fj+ fj− ,

and we will proceed now to prove this via induction. Clearly e0 TOP ∈ Zev . For any
m ∈ N, we have




−m 2
T mS = 
 .
− 12 0

This implies the base case for induction on n, i.e. we have




TZbΛ1 ◦ SZΛ (e0 TOP) = (−1)N β 2 2−N

N 
Y



e0 + 2b1 e0 fj+ fj− .

j=1

Assume now that it is true up to n. Then

(−1)N n β 2n 2−N

n−1
Y

[bj ; bj−1 , . . . , b1 ]

j=1



b

= TZΛn+1 ◦ SZΛ

N 
Y
j=1

!N −1

1
 Y



TZbΛi ◦ SZΛ (e0 TOP)


i=n+1

e0 + 2[bn ; bn−1 , . . . , b1 ]e0 fj+ fj−



NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

=β
(∗)

2

65


1 
2e0 fj+ fj− + 2[bn ; bn−1 , . . . , b1 ] − bn+1 e0 fj+ fj− − e0
2
j=1
N 
Y



= (−1)N β 2 [bn ; bn−1 , . . . , b1 ]

N 
N Y



e0 + 2[bn+1 ; bn , . . . , b1 ]e0 fj+ fj− ,

j=1

as claimed. In step (∗) we used that by definition of the continued fraction in (3.16)
we have
1
.
[bn+1 ; bn , . . . , b1 ] = bn+1 −
[bn ; bi−1 , . . . , b1 ]
Multiplying out the product and using β 4 = (−1)N yields (7.14).

□

Proof of Proposition 7.2 Part 2. Because of the assumptions on the continued fraction, Proposition A.1 gives
n−1
Y

[aj ; aj−1 , . . . , a1 ] =

j=1

n
qY
[aj ; aj−1 , . . . , a1 ] = q .
p j=1

The formula then follows from Lemma 7.4.

□

7.3. Categorical trace: Lyubashenko invariant. By (3.27), it remains to compute εL ◦ f (a) which we know from (7.6) to be equal to ⟨Λ|fd
(a)⟩ (recall that α = 1
for Q(N, β)).
Since by (7.8), Λ is proportional to TOP∗ , it can only see part of fd
(a) which lives
in ZΛ . Using Proposition 7.2 we can simply read off
⟨Λ|fd
(a)⟩ = 2β 6n

X

p

|s|

 N −|s|
q

s∈ZN
2

2

∗

⟨TOP |e0

N 
Y

fj+ fj−

sj

⟩ = β 6n pN

j=1

Combining this with D = 1 and δ = β −2 from Section 5.1.3, altogether (3.27) gives
LyuΛ (L(p, q)) = pN .

(7.15)

7.4. Modified trace: Renormalised Lyubashenko invariant. Here we compute
the renormalised Lyubashenko invariant L′Λ, t (Lx (α, P )), x ∈ {∗, ◦} with t the modified trace on the projective ideal. To do so, according to Proposition 7.1 we need to
compute the central elements ζx and the pairings (−, −)U .
We start with the explicit expressions for ζx for which we will need two preliminary
lemmas. For z ∈ Z(Q) write
F (z) = ⟨Λ|S −1 (Φ1 Ψ1 )α z Φ2 M1 Ψ2 ⟩ · Φ3 M2 Ψ3 .
Note that F (fd
(a)) = ζ◦ .
Lemma 7.5. F (z) = ⟨Λ|zM1 ⟩ · M2
Proof. From the expression (5.3) for the coassociator of Q, we immediately see that
the claim is true if z is in the even sector, and therefore we must only show it for

66

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

z = e1 z. The first and second tensor factor of Φ±1 in F (z) are then multiplied by e1 ,
and we have




(e1 ⊗ e1 ⊗ 1) · Φ±1 = e1 ⊗ e1 ⊗ e0 KN + e1 β ± .
Inserting this simplified expression in F (z) gives






F (z) = ⟨Λ|zM1 ⟩ e0 KN + e1 β + M2 e0 KN + e1 β −






= ⟨Λ|zM1 ⟩ e0 KN M2 KN + e1 β + M2 β − ,

(7.16)

where in the second step we used that e0 , e1 are central. Since z is central, it in
particular commutes with K and hence contains an even number of fs. By (7.8), Λ is
a multiple of TOP∗ and so the amount of fs in the monodromy factors that contribute
to the above expression is even as well. It follows that the non-zero summands
M2 commute with K and therefore also with KN and β ± . Since K2N e0 = e0 and
β + β − = 1, the claim follows.
□
Next we compute F (z) for some special values of z:
Lemma 7.6. We have








F ϕX1± = ±2−N ϕP + + 12 (ϕX + + ϕX1− ) ,
0

F ϕP + = 2
0



F e0

N
Y

N −1

1

(ϕX + − ϕX1− ) ,
1



(fj+ fj− )sj = β 2 2N −2|s| (−1)|s| e0

j=1

N
Y

(fk+ fk− )1−sk

for s ∈ ZN
2 .

k=1

Proof. Recall
from Section 5.1.2 that the monodromy matrix of Q can be written
P
N
as M = I∈X gI ⊗ fI , where the index set X is Z2 × Z2 × ZN
2 × Z2 , and for I =
(a, b, c, d) ∈ X, fI and gI are as in (5.7). Substituting (7.8) and (5.18), one computes
F (ϕX1± ) = ±β 6 22
(a)

= ±β 6 22

(b)

= ±β 6 2

X

fI × ⟨TOP∗ |e±
1 gI ⟩

I∈X

X

N
Y

b,c

k=1

(−β 2 )b 22|c| (−1)b|c| · Keb

X

N
Y

b,c

k=1

(−β 2 )b 22|c| (−1)b|c| · Keb
∗

b
(fk− fk+ )ck × ⟨TOP∗ |e±
1K

= ±β

6

2

2N

Ke0

N
Y

(fk− fk+ )ck

∗

N 
Y
k=1
N
Y

fk− fk+ ∓ i(−1)N β 2 · Ke1

= ±β 6 (−1)N 22N Ke0 TOP − i2N Ke1

δck ,0 1 − (2δck ,0 + δck ,1 )fk+ fk−
1
X

(−4)

ck







!

⟩
!

2δck ,0 + δck ,1 (fk− fk+ )ck

k=1 ck =0

k=1
(d)

(fk+ fk− )ck ⟩

k=1

× δb,0 δc,1 ⟨TOP |e1 TOP⟩ ± iδb,1 ⟨TOP |e1
(c)

N
Y

N 
Y



1 − 2fk+ fk− .

k=1
±
∗
In step (a) we used that e1 ea = δa,1 e±
1 , that the evaluation against TOP can be
−
+
+
non-zero only if each fk is paired with fk , resulting in d = c, and that e1 fk ω− fk− ω− =

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

67

−e1 fk+ fk− , giving an additional factor (−1)|c| . In step (b) we substituted the explicit

+ −
+ −
+ − ck
=
e
δ
1−(2δ
+δ
)f
f
form of e±
in
(5.15)
and
used
e
(1−2f
f
)(f
f
)
1 ck ,0
ck ,0
ck ,1 k k .
1
1
k k
k k
+ −
For step (c) note that only the product with
all fk fk can be non-zero against TOP∗ ,

P QN
Q
resulting in a factor N
c k=1 ⇝
k=1 2δck ,0 + δck ,1 . In addition, we replaced
QN P1
N
in both summands in step (d) arises from
ck =0 . The extra factor of (−1)
k=1
reordering the fs.
To write this in our preferred basis of the centre, note from (5.15) and (7.9) that
ϕP + = 23N β 2 Ke0 TOP ,
0









−
ϕX + + ϕX − = 2N +1 e+
= −2N +1 ie1 K
1 − e1
1

1

N
Y

(1 − 2fj+ fj− ) ,

j=1

−
= 2N +1 e1 .
ϕX + − ϕX1− = 2N +1 e+
1 + e1
1

From this we read off
F (ϕX1± ) = ±2−N ϕP + + 21 (ϕX + + ϕX1− ) ,
1

0

as claimed. For the remaining two equalities, first note that for z ∈ Z(Q) in the even
sector, i.e. z = e0 z, we have
F (z) = β 6 2−N +1

fI ⟨TOP∗ |z gI ⟩

X
I∈X

= β 6 2−N +1

X

N
Y

22|c| (−1)b|c| ⟨TOP∗ |zKb

(fk+ fk− )ck ⟩eb

k=1

b,c

N
Y

(fk− fk+ )ck .

k=1

This immediately yields
F (ϕP + ) = 22N e1 = 2N −1 (ϕX + − ϕX1− )
1

0

and


F e0

N
Y



(fj+ fj− )sj = β 6 2−N

j=1

X

22|c| ⟨TOP∗ |

N
Y

(fj+ fj− )sj +cj ⟩e0

j=1

b,c

= β 6 2N −2|s| (−1)N −|s| e0

N
Y

N
Y

(fk− fk+ )ck

k=1

(fk+ fk− )1−sk .

k=1

□
With these preparations, we can compute ζ∗ , ζ◦ from Proposition 7.1:
Lemma 7.7. We have
ζ∗ = ⟨Λ|fd
(a)⟩ · 1 = β 6n pN · 1


−
ζ◦ = F (fd
(a)) = 2−2N c0n+1 ϕP + + c+
n+1 ϕX + + cn+1 ϕX −
0

+ β 6n pN

X 
s∈ZN
2

1

1

− 2q
p

|s|

e0

N
Y

(fj+ fj− )sj .

j=1



68

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

In the expression for ζ◦ we have extended the recursive definition of c0,±
in (7.12) to
i
n + 1 by setting an+1 = 0.
Proof. The expression for ζ∗ was already computed in Section 7.3. To get the result for
ζ◦ , recall from Proposition 7.2 the decomposition of fd
(a) into summands in Z(Q) =
ZP ⊕ ZΛ . Using the formulas from the preceding lemma, we get
 Prop. 7.2



F fd
(a)

ZΛ

Lem. 7.6

=

=

2N β 6n+2

X

p|s|

s∈ZN
2

2 β
N

6n+4

e0

N X
1
Y

p

sj

N 
Y

q
2

 1−sj
q

j=1 sj =0

= 2N β 6n+4 e0

 N −|s|

2

qfj+ fj− − p2−1 1



F e0

N 
Y

fj+ fj−

sj 

j=1



21−2sj (−1)sj fj+ fj−

1−sj



j=1

= β p

6n N

!|s|

2q
−
p

X
s∈ZN
2

e0

N
Y

(fj+ fj− )sj .

j=1

On the projective centre ZP , we find
 Prop. 7.2



F fd
(a)

ZP

=

Lem. 7.6

=





−
2−2N c0n F (ϕP + ) + c+
n F (ϕX + ) + cn F (ϕX1− )
1

0









−
0 N −1
−
2−2N 2−N c+
+ 12 (c+
n + cn ) ϕX +
n − cn ϕP + + cn 2
0

1

!





−
+ − c0n 2N −1 + 12 (c+
n + cn ) ϕX −
1

.

The coefficients match the recursive definition of c0n+1 , c±
n+1 from (7.12) under the
convention that an+1 = 0. Adding the two expressions gives the claimed result for
ζ◦ .
□
This completes the computation of ζ∗ and ζ◦ and we now turn to the pairings
(−, −)P from (7.4). Let t be the modified trace associated with the symmetrised
cointegral in (5.10), which was explicitly given by
2
m
N −N
b r (Km TOP) = c δ
λ
.
t m,odd (β + i ) where ct = (−1) 2

Fix an isotypic decomposition Q = U nU PU with idempotents eU and where the sum
runs over distinct irreducibles U . We abbreviate {z, z ′ }U := (z, z ′ )nU PU . In terms of
the symmetrised cointegral, the pairing is given by
L

b r |e zz ′ ⟩ .
{z, z ′ }U = ⟨λ
U

(7.17)

Explicitly, nX ± = 1 and nX ± = 2N , so that
0

1

{z, z }X0± = (z, z ′ )P0± ,
′

{z, z ′ }X1± = 2N (z, z ′ )X1± .

The next lemma gives the value of the pairing on the basis (7.11) of Z(Q).

(7.18)

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

(1) For U = X0± we have

Lemma 7.8.

n

e0 , ϕP +

o

0

and



e

N
Y

 0

69

(fj+ )rj (fj− )sj , e0

j=1

N
Y

= 22N −1

X0±

(fj+ )tj (fj− )uj





j=1

= ±εδr+t,1 δs+u,1 2−N −1 β −2 ,
X0±

where ε = ε(r, s, t, u) is a sign, which is +1 if r = s or t = u. For all other
combinations of basis elements in (7.11), the pairing is zero.
(2) For U = X1± , the only non-zero values of the pairing are
n

ϕX ± , ϕX ±
1

1

o
X1±

= ±22N +1

Proof. Note first of all that the map z 7→ {z, −}U is zero on the odd part of z if PU
is from the even sector. The same is true when swapping even and odd.
(1) For U = X0± we have eU = e±
0 as in (5.14). From (7.9) we see that ϕP0+ =
3N 2
2 β Ke0 TOP already contains TOP as a factor and so the only non-zero pairing can
be with the basis element e0 . We compute
n

e0 , ϕP +

o
X0±

0

b r |e± K · TOP⟩ = 22N −1 .
= 23N β 2 ⟨λ
0

Let now r, s, t, u ∈ ZN
2 with |r| + |s| and |t| + |u| even. We have
N
Y

N
Y

!

e0 (fj+ )rj (fj− )sj
j=1

!

e0 (fj+ )tj (fj− )uj
j=1

·

= εe0

N
Y

(fj+ )rj +tj (fj− )sj +uj ,

j=1

where ε is a sign depending on r, s, t, u, which we do not compute explicitly. If r = s
or t = u, this sign is +1 as a pair fj+ fj− commutes with everything in the even sector.
This shows
that


N

Y
+ rj − sj
b r |e± TOP⟩
= εδr+t,1 δs+u,1 ⟨λ
e0 (fj ) (fj ) , e0 (fj+ )tj (fj− )uj
0


j=1
j=1
X±



N
Y

0

(6.1)

= ±εδr+t,1 δs+u,1 2−N −1 β −2 .

±
(2) For the odd sector, recall from (5.18) that ϕX1± = ±2N +1 e±
1 , and since e1 are
orthogonal, we only need to compute:

n

ϕX ± , ϕX ±
1

1

o
X1±

(6.2)

b r |e± ⟩ = ±22N +1
= 22N +2 ⟨λ
1

(7.19)

as claimed.

□

Now we are ready to provide the invariants for all natural endomorphisms of the
identity functor, acting on the non-contractible loop in L(p, q) as given in (3.21).
Theorem 7.9. We have, for the basis elements in (7.11) and t ∈ ZN
2 ,
L′Λ, t (L◦ (e0

N
Y


 1 c0

2n
± 21 β 2 q N ,
n+1 β
+ − tj
±
2
(fj fj ) , P0 )) = 
±(−1)|t| β 2 2−|t|−1 q N −|t| p|t| ,
j=1

t = 0,
|t| > 0

70

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

L′Λ, t (L◦ (ϕP + , P0± )) = 22N −1 pN
0

L′Λ, t (L◦ (ϕX1± , X1± )) = ±21−N β 2n c±
n+1 .
Note that combining the first formula in the theorem above for t = 0 with Remark 7.3 results in the invariant L′Λ, t (L◦ (id, P0± )) as stated in Theorem 3.18.
b ζ◦ )P , with
Proof. Recall from Proposition 7.1 that L′Λ, t (L◦ (α, P )) = δ −σ D −1−n (α,
σ = n by (3.19) and ζ◦ is given in Lemma 7.7. From Section 5.1.3 we have D = 1
and δ = β −2 so the surgery coefficient of L◦ is β 2σ . Let t ∈ ZN
2 with |t| ≥ 1. Using
Lemma 7.8, we compute
n

e0

N
Y

(fj+ fj− )tj , ζ◦

o

j=1

X 

= β 6n pN

X0±

− 2q
p

|s| n

e0

N
Y

(fj+ fj− )tj , e0

j=1

s∈ZN
2

= ±β 6n+6 pN 2−N −1

X 

− 2q
p

N
Y

(fj+ fj− )sj

j=1

|s|

o
X0±

δs,1−t

s∈ZN
2



= ±β 6n+6 pN 2−N −1 − 2q
p

N −|t|

= ±(−1)|t| β 6n+2 2−|t|−1 q N −|t| p|t| .

If |t| = 0, then
n

e0 , ζ◦

o

n

−2N 0
cn+1 e0 , ϕP +
± = 2

X0

0

o
X0±

+ β 6n (−2q)N {e0 , e0 TOP}X ±
0

= 2−2N c0n+1 22N −1 ± β 6n (−2q)N 2−N −1 β 2 (−1)N
= 12 c0n+1 ± 12 β 6n+2 q N .
Finally, we have
n

ϕP0± , ζ◦

o
X0±

=β p

6n N

X 
s∈ZN
2

n

N
 
o
Y
2q |s|
−p
ϕP0± , e0 (fj+ fj− )sj ±
X0
j=1

= β 6n pN ϕP0± , e0
n

ϕX ± , ζ◦
1

o
X1±

o
X0±

= 22N −1 β 6n pN , and

= ±2c±
n+1 .

Combining with (7.18) to translate {−, −}U into (−, −)PU results in the statement
of the theorem.
□
Remark 7.10. Let us discuss a quick sanity check of the formulas above. In the
category of modules over a factorisable (or, more generally, unimodular) ribbon
quasi-Hopf algebra H, there is a natural transformation α : idC ⇒ idC such that
αP1 is non-zero and factors through 1, cf. Remark 3.17. Indeed, if c is an integral in H, then it is central by unimodularity, and thus acting by it yields a natural transformation. In the notation of Section 3.4, we must then necessarily have
L′Λ, t (L∗ (c, P1 )) = L′Λ, t (L◦ (c, P1 )). Indeed, this can be checked directly. Let c be the

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

71

integral of Q corresponding to Λco with normalisation such that Λco ◦ Λ = id1 . By
[FGR2, Sec. 3.5], it is explicitly given by
(5.18)

(7.13)

−2N
c = 2N +1 β 2 e+
ϕP + + 2N β 2 e0 TOP .
0 TOP = ϕ1 = 2
0

We saw in the proof of Lemma 4.5 that tP + (c) = 1. On the one hand, combining
0
(3.26) and (7.15) gives
L′Λ, t (L∗ (c, P0+ )) = pN .
On the other hand, using Theorem 7.9 and the expansion of c in the basis of the
centre we get
L′Λ, t (L◦ (c, P0+ )) = 2−2N L′Λ, t (L◦ (ϕP + , P0+ )) + 2N β 2 L′Λ, t (L◦ (e0 TOP, P0+ ))
0

= 12 pN + 21 β 2 (−1)N β 2 pN = pN ,
as expected.

△

7.5. Pullback trace. Finally, we consider H = Q(2, β) and A as in Section 5.3, and
treat the invariants for lens spaces with one loop coloured by the object Pµ from the
pullback ideal (cf. Proposition 5.5).
We start by computing the values of Res∗ (tA )Pµ(z) for z from the 11-dimensional
− +
centre of H (recall (7.10)), and where µ = ab− ab+ .
Lemma 7.11. The only non-zero values of Res∗ (tA )Pµ (z) for z an element from the
canonical basis (7.11) of Z(H) are
z ∈ Z(H)
Res∗ (tA )Pµ (z)

e0 f1+ f1− e0 f2+ f2−
1

det µ

e0 f1γ f2ε
δγ,+ aε − δγ,− bε

,

where γ, ε ∈ {+, −}.
Proof. Using Proposition 5.8, we compute
b A,r (e+ f − f + ) =
λ
0 1 1

3
1 X
b A,r (Km f − f + ) = 1 (1 − iβ 2 ) ,
λ
1 1
4 m=0
4

so that in our chosen normalisation (5.24), the pullback trace at Pµ equals 1 on
+ −
+ −
+ −
e+
0 f1 f1 . From Corollary 5.6, we know that f2 f2 acts on Pµ as det µ · f1 f1 . Similarly,
γ ε
from (5.21) one finds for γ, ε ∈ {+, −} and p ∈ Pµ that f1 f2 p = (δγ,+ aε − δγ,− bε ) ·
f1+ f1− p.
Likewise, f1+ f1− f2+ f2− is seen to act as 0, whence the trace vanishes for ϕP + . Finally,
0
since Pµ is purely even, ϕX1± act as zero as well.
□
As above, we have a symmetric bilinear pairing (z, z ′ )Pµ := Res∗ (tA )Pµ (zz ′ ) for
z, z ′ ∈ Z(H). Then Lemma 7.11 shows that the only non-zero values are
(e0 , e0 f1+ f1− )Pµ = 1,

(e0 , e0 f2+ f2− )Pµ = det µ,

and
(e0 , e0 f1γ f2ε )Pµ = δγ,+ aε − δγ,− bε .

72

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

Theorem 7.12. The invariants L′Λ, Res∗ (tA ) (L◦ (z, Pµ )) for basis elements z of Z(H)
as in (7.11) are:
z

L′Λ, Res∗ (tA ) (L◦ (z, Pµ ))

ϕP + , ϕX1±

0

e0

−2pq(1 + det µ)

e0 fj+ fj−

p2 (δj,1 + δj,2 det µ)

e0 f1γ f2ε

p2 (δγ,+ aε − δγ,− bε )

e0 TOP

0

0

Proof. The surgery coefficient is β 2σ as in the proof of Theorem 7.9. By Proposition 7.1 we need to compute (z, ζ◦ )Pµ . The zero entries in the table are immediate
from Lemma 7.11. Using Lemma 7.7, we first compute


e0 , ζ◦


Pµ

= β 6n p2

X
s∈Z22

2q
−
p

!|s|



e0 , e0

2
Y

(fj+ fj− )sj

j=1



= −β 6n 2pq e0 , e0 f1+ f1− + e0 f2+ f2−


Pµ


Pµ

= −2β pq(1 + det µ) .
6n

Since σ = n, β 2σ+6n = 1. Similarly, we have




e0 fj+ fj− , ζ◦
= β 6n p2
Pµ

X
s∈Z22

2q
−
p

!|s|



= β 6n p2 e0 fj+ fj− , e0



e0 fj+ fj− , e0

2
Y

(fj+ fj− )sj

j=1


Pµ


Pµ

= β p (δj,1 + δj,2 det µ) .
6n 2

A completely analogous computation shows


e0 f1γ f2ε , ζ◦





Pµ

= β 6n p2 e0 f1γ f2ε , e0


Pµ

= β 6n p2 (δγ,+ aε − δγ,− bε ) .
□

Theorem 7.12 shows the result stated in Theorem 3.20. In particular, the invariants in the above theorem manage to distinguish all Pµ , by evaluating on all e0 f1γ f2ε .
Explicitly, the choices for αj,l in Theorem 3.20 are
α1,1 = e0 f1+ f2− , α1,2 = e0 f1+ f2+ , α2,1 = −e0 f1− f2− , α2,2 = −e0 f1− f2+ .
Appendix A. More on continued fractions
Consider the (n × n)-matrix Ma with entries
(Ma )ij =


a
1

i

i=j ,
(i < n ∧ j = i + 1) ∨ (i > 1 ∧ j = i − 1) .

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

73

This is precisely the linking matrix of the surgery link of L(p, q) as given in (3.17),
see e.g. [Lyu, Sec. 5.3]. By definition, the signature σ(L(p, q)) of the surgery link
is the signature of the linking matrix, i.e. the number of positive minus negative
eigenvalues.
Proposition A.1. Let a1 , . . . , an ∈ Z be non-zero such that there are coprime positive
integers pi , qi with pqii = [ai ; ai+1 , . . . , an ] for i = 1, . . . , n. Then we have:
(1) det Ma = nj=1 [aj ; aj+1 , . . . , an ] .
(2) Ma is positive definite, and so its signature is n.
Q
Q
(3) p1 = nj=1 [aj ; aj+1 , . . . , an ] = nj=1 [an−j+1 ; an−j , . . . , a1 ] .
Q

Proof. Part 1: We proceed by induction on n. For n = 1 this is obvious, and to see
what is happening note that for n = 2 we have


[a1 ; a2 ] · a2 = (a1 − a12 )a2 = a1 a2 − 1 = det a11 a12



.

Assume now that
the statement holds up to n − 1 for a given n ≥ 2. Setting
Qn
d(a1 , . . . , an ) = j=1 [aj ; aj+1 , . . . , an ], we note that d(ai , . . . , an ) = [ai ; ai+1 , . . . , an ]
d(ai+1 , . . . , an ). Using the Laplace expansion for the first row, we obtain
1 1

0

0

det Ma = a1 · det Ma\(a1 ) − 1 · det ..
.

···0 

Ma\(a1 ,a2 )



0

= a1 · det Ma\(a1 ) − det Ma\(a1 ,a2 ) ,
where by Ma\b we mean the matrix associated to the list obtained by removing entries
of b from a. By hypothesis, we know the values of the two determinants on the right
hand side, and so we obtain
det Ma = a1 · d(a2 , . . . , an ) − d(a3 , . . . , an )
1
= d(a2 , . . . , an ) · a1 −
[a2 ; . . . , an ]

!

= d(a2 , . . . , an ) · [a1 ; a2 , . . . , an ] ,

which equals d(a1 , . . . , an ), as claimed.
Part 2: Positive definiteness now follows from the Sylvester criterion. Namely,
consider the lower right submatrices Nd , d = 1, . . . , n of M . That is, (Nd )st =
(Ma )s+n−d,t+n−d and s, t = 1, . . . , d.
Using the above notation, we see that Nd = M(an−d+1 ,an−d+2 ,...,an ) . Thus by part 1
Q
Q
we get det Nd = nj=n−d+1 [aj ; aj+1 , . . . , an ] = nj=n−d+1 pqjj , and all factors are positive
by assumption.
Part 3: By part 1, the second equality is simply the statement that the similar
matrices M(a1 ,...,an ) and M(an ,...,a1 ) have the same determinant.
To see the first equality, note first that
n
Y

n
Y
pj

Y pj+1
p1 n−1
[aj ; aj+1 , . . . , an ] =
=
.
qn j=1 qj
j=1
j=1 qj

74

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

Since clearly qn = 1, this equals p1 if qj = pj+1 for all 1 ≤ j < n. Let us show that
this holds. For j < n, we have
pj
qj+1
aj pj+1 − qj+1
= aj −
=
.
qj
pj+1
pj+1
Now, for any c, d, n ∈ Z with d|n, we have gcd(n ± c, d) ≤ gcd(c, d).18 Applying
this to our situation, we find gcd(aj pj+1 − qj+1 , pj+1 ) ≤ gcd(qj+1 , pj+1 ) = 1, and so
the above is in fact an equality of reduced fractions. Thus we even obtain equality
of numerators and denominators up to sign. But the sign vanishes in light of our
positivity assumption; in particular, we obtain qj = pj+1 .
□
The proposition above in particular implies (3.19) for the signature of the surgery
link. The same expression (with the stronger assumption that all ai are at least 2)
was obtained e.g. in [BCGP, Prop. 6.24].
References
[Ab]
[BBG]
[BC1]
[BC2]
[BCGP]

[BCPO]
[BGR1]
[BGR2]
[BK]
[BKLT]
[Br]
[BT]
[BV1]
[BV2]
[BW]

T. Abe, A Z2 -orbifold model of the symplectic fermionic vertex operator superalgebra,
Mathematische Zeitschrift 255 (2007) 755–792 [math/0503472 [math.QA]].
A. Beliakova, C. Blanchet, A.M. Gainutdinov, Modified trace is a symmetrised integral,
Select. Math. New Ser. 27 (2021), [1801.00321 [math.QA]].
D. Bulacu, S. Caenepeel, Integrals for (dual) quasi-Hopf algebras. Applications, J. Algebra
266 (2003), 552–583, [math/0110063 [math.QA]].
D. Bulacu, S. Caenepeel, On integrals and cointegrals for quasi-Hopf algebras, J. Algebra
351 (2012), 390–425, [1103.2263 [math.QA]].
C. Blanchet, F. Costantino, N. Geer, B. Patureau-Mirand, Non semi-simple TQFTs,
Reidemeister torsion and Kashaev’s invariants, Adv. Math. 301 (2016) 1–78, [1404.7289
[math.GT]].
D. Bulacu, S. Caenepeel, F. Panaite, F. v.Ostaeyen, Quasi-Hopf algebras: a categorical
approach, Encyclopedia Math. Appl. (2019).
J. Berger, A.M. Gainutdinov, I. Runkel, Modified traces for quasi-Hopf algebras, J. Algebra 548 (2020) 96–119, [1812.10445 [math.QA]].
, Monadic cointegrals and applications to quasi-Hopf algebras, J. Pure Appl.
Algebra 225 (2021) 106678, [2003.13307 [math.QA]]
B. Bakalov, A. Kirilov Jr., Lectures on tensor categories and modular functors, Univ.
Lect. Ser. 21 (2001).
Y. Bespalov, T. Kerler, V. Lyubashenko, V. Turaev, Integrals for braided Hopf algebras,
J. Pure Appl. Algebra 148 (2000) 113–164, [q-alg/9709020 [math.QA]]
A. Bruguières, Tresses et structure entière sur la catégorie des représentations de slN
quantique, Commun. in Algebra 28 (2000) 1989–2028.
D. Bulacu, B. Torrecillas, Factorizable quasi-Hopf algebras – applications, J. Pure Appl.
Alg. 194 (2004) 39–84 [math/0312076 [[math.QA/0312076]]].
A. Bruguières, A. Virelizier, Hopf monads, Adv. in Math. 215 (2007) 679–733,
[math/0604180 [math.QA]].
, On the center of fusion categories, Pacific J. Math. 264 (2013), [1203.4180
[math.QA]]
J.W. Barrett, B.W. Westbury, Spherical categories, Adv. in Math. 143 (1999) 357–375,
[hep-th/9310164 [hep-th]].

18If x divides gcd(d, n ± c), then since d divides n also x divides n, and hence x divides c.

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

[CDGS]

75

W. Cheong, A. Doser, M. Gray, S.F. Sawin, Relationship of the Hennings and ChernSimons Invariants For Higher Rank Quantum Groups, [1701.01423 [math.GT]]
[CG]
T. Creutzig, T. Gannon, Logarithmic conformal field theory, log-modular tensor categories and modular forms, J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 50 (2017) 404004, [1605.04630
[math.QA]].
[CGP1]
F. Costantino, N. Geer, B. Patureau-Mirand, Quantum invariants of 3-manifolds via
link surgery presentations and non-semi-simple categories, Journal of Topology 7 (2014)
1005–1053, [1202.3553 [math.GT]].
[CGP2]
F. Costantino, N. Geer, B. Patureau-Mirand, Relations between Witten-reshetikhinturaev and non semi-simple sl(2) 3-manifold invariants, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 15 (2015)
1363–1386, [1310.2735 [math.GT]].
[CGR]
T. Creutzig, A. M. Gainutdinov and I. Runkel, A quasi-Hopf algebra for the triplet vertex
operator algebra, Commun. Contemp. Math. 22 (2020) 1950024, [1712.07260 [math.QA]].
[CKS]
Q. Chen, S. Kuppum, P. Srinivasan, On the relation between the WRT invariant and
the Hennings invariant, Math. Proc. of the Cambridge Phil. Soc. 146 (2009) 151–163,
[0709.2318 [math.QA]]
[CLR]
T. Creutzig, S. Lentner and M. Rupert, Characterizing braided tensor categories associated to logarithmic vertex operator algebras, [2104.13262 [math.QA]].
[CYZ]
Q. Chen, C-C. Yu, Y. Zhang, Three-manifold invariants associated with restricted quantum groups, Math. Z. 272 (2012) 987–999.
[DGGPR1] M. De Renzi, A.M. Gainutdinov, N. Geer, B. Patureau-Mirand, I. Runkel, 3-dimensional
TQFTs from non-semisimple modular categories, Selecta Math. 28 (2022) 42, [1912.02063
[math.GT]].
, Mapping Class Group Representations From Non-Semisimple TQFTs,
[DGGPR2]
Commun. Contemp. Math. 25 (2023) 2150091, [2010.14852 [math.GT]].
[DGP]
M. De Renzi, N. Geer, B. Patureau-Mirand, Renormalized Hennings invariants and 2+1TQFTs, Commun. Math. Phys. 362 (2018), 855–907, [1707.08044 [math.GT]].
[Dr]
V. Drinfeld, Quasi-Hopf algebras, Leningrad Math. J. 1 (1990), 1419–1457.
[DR]
A. Davydov, I. Runkel, Z/2Z-extensions of Hopf algebra module categories by their base
categories, Adv. Math. 247 (2013) 192–265, [1207.3611 [math.QA]].
[EGNO] P. Etingof, S. Gelaki, D. Nikshych, V. Ostrik, Tensor categories, Math. Surveys Monogr.
205 (2015).
[EO]
P. Etingof, V. Ostrik, On Semisimplification of Tensor Categories, in: V. Baranovsky et
al. (eds) Representation Theory and Algebraic Geometry, Trends in Mathematics (2022),
Birkhäuser (2022) 3–35, [1801.04409 [math.RT]].
[Et]
P. Etingof, On Vafa’s theorem for tensor categories, Math. Res. Let. 9 (2002) 651–657,
[math/0207007 [math.QA]].
[FGR1]
V. Farsad, A.M. Gainutdinov, I. Runkel, SL(2, Z)-action for ribbon quasi-Hopf algebras,
J. Algebra 522 (2019), 243–308, [1702.01086 [math.QA]].
[FGR2]
, The symplectic fermion ribbon quasi-Hopf algebra and the SL(2, Z)-action
on its centre, Adv. Math. 400 (2022) 108247, [1706.08164 [math.QA]].
[FGST]
B.L. Feigin, A.M. Gainutdinov, A.M. Semikhatov, I.Y. Tipunin, Modular group representations and fusion in logarithmic conformal field theories and in the quantum group
center, Commun. Math. Phys. 265 (2006) 47–93, [hep-th/0504093 [hep-th]].
[FL]
I. Flandoli, S. Lentner, Logarithmic conformal field theories of type Bn , ℓ = 4 and symplectic fermions, J. Math. Phys. 59 (2018) 071701, [1706.07994 [math.RT]].
[FOG]
A. Fontalvo Orozco, A.M. Gainutdinov, Module traces and Hopf group-coalgebras,
[1809.01122 [math.QA]].
[FS]
J. Fuchs, C. Schweigert, Hopf algebras and finite tensor categories in conformal field
theory, Rev. Union Mat. Argentina 51 (2010) 43–90, [1004.3405 [hep-th]]].
[GK]
M.R. Gaberdiel, H.G. Kausch, A rational logarithmic conformal field theory, Phys. Lett.
B 386 (1996) 131–137 [hep-th/9606050 [hep-th]].

76

[GKP1]

[GKP2]
[GKP3]
[GN]
[GPT]

[GPV]
[GR1]
[GR2]
[GR3]
[He]
[HN]
[LW]
[Lyu]

[Ka]
[Ke]
[KL]
[ML]
[MR]
[Mu]

[PS]
[RT]
[Ru]
[Sch]
[Sh1]
[Sh2]

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

N. Geer, J. Kujawa, B. Patureau-Mirand, Generalized trace and modified dimension
functions on ribbon categories, B. Sel. Math. New Ser. 17 (2011), 453–404, [1001.0985
[math.RT]].
, Ambidextrous objects and trace functions for nonsemisimple categories,
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 141 (2013), 2963–2978, [1106.4477 [math.RT]].
, M-traces in (non-unimodular) pivotal categories, Algebr. Represent. Theory (2021), [1809.00499 [math.RT]].
T. Gannon, C. Negron Quantum SL(2) and logarithmic vertex operator algebras at (p, 1)central charge, [2104.12821 [math.QA]].
N. Geer, B. Patureau-Mirand, V.G. Turaev, Modified quantum dimensions and
re-normalized link invariants, Compositio Math. 145 (2009), 196–212, [0711.4229
[math.QA]].
N. Geer, B. Patureau-Mirand, A. Virelizier Traces on ideals in pivotal categories, Quantum Topol. 4 (2013), 91–124, [1103.1660 [math.QA]].
A.M. Gainutdinov, I. Runkel, Symplectic fermions and a quasi-Hopf algebra structure on
U i sℓ(2), J. Algebra 476 (2017) 415–458, [1503.07695 [math.QA]].
, The non-semisimple Verlinde formula and pseudo-trace functions, J. Pure
Appl. Algebra 223 (2019), 660–690, [1605.04448 [math.QA]].
, Projective objects and the modified trace in factorisable finite tensor categories, Compositio Math. 156 (2020) 770–821, [1703.00150 [math.QA]].
M. Hennings, Invariants of Links and 3-Manifolds Obtained from Hopf Algebras, J. London Math. Soc. (2) 54 (1996), No. 3, 594–624.
F. Hausser, F. Nill, Integral theory for quasi-Hopf algebras,
[math/9904164 [math.QA]].
R. Laugwitz, C. Walton, Constructing non-semisimple modular categories with relative
monoidal centers, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN (2021), [2010.11872 [math.QA]].
V.V. Lyubashenko, Invariants of 3-manifolds and projective representations of mapping
class groups via quantum groups at roots of unity Commun. Math. Phys. 172 (1995),
467–516, [hep-th/9405167 [hep-th]].
H.G. Kausch, Curiosities at c = -2, [hep-th/9510149 [hep-th]].
T. Kerler, On the connectivity of cobordisms and half-projective TQFTs, Commun. Math.
Phys. 198 (1998) 535–590, [q-alg/9603017 [math.QA]].
T. Kerler, V. V. Lyubashenko, Non-semisimple topological quantum field theories for
3-manifolds with corners, Lecture Notes in Math. 1765 (2001).
S. Mac Lane, Categories for the working mathematician, Grad. Texts in Math. 5 (1998).
R. McRae, Deligne tensor products of categories of modules for vertex operator algebras,
[2304.14023 [math.QA]].
M. Müger, From subfactors to categories and topology II: The quantum double of tensor
categories and subfactors, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 180 (2003) 159–219, [math/0111205
[math.CT]].
V.V. Prasolov, A.B. Sossinsky, Knots, links, braids and 3-manifolds, Transl. Math.
Monogr. 154 (1997).
N. Reshetikhin, V. Turaev, Ribbon Graphs and Their Invariants Derived From Quantum
Groups, Commun. Math. Phys. 127 (1990) 1–26.
I. Runkel, A braided monoidal category for free super-bosons, J. Math. Phys. 55 041702
(2014) [1209.5554 [math.QA]].
P. Schauenburg, A quasi-Hopf algebra freeness theorem, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 132
(2004) 965–972, [math/0204141 [math.QA]].
K. Shimizu, On unimodular finite tensor categories, Int. Math. Res. Notices 2017 (2017)
277–322, [1402.3482 [math.QA]].
K. Shimizu, The monoidal center and the character algebra, J. Pure and Appl. Algebra
221 (2017) 2338–2371, [1504.01178 [math.QA]].

NON-SEMISIMPLE LINK AND MANIFOLD INVARIANTS

[Sh3]
[Sh4]
[Sh5]
[So]
[Tu]
[Vi]

77

K. Shimizu, Non-degeneracy conditions for braided finite tensor categories, Adv. Math.
355 (2019) 106778 [1602.06534 [math.QA]].
K. Shimizu, Integrals for finite tensor categories, Algebr. Represent. Theory 22 (2019)
459–493, [1702.02425 [math.CT]].
K. Shimizu, Ribbon structures of the Drinfeld center of a finite tensor category, Kodai
Math. J. 46 (2023) 75–114, [1707.09691 [math.QA]].
Y. Sommerhäuser, On the notion of a ribbon quasi-Hopf algebra, Rev. Unión Mat. Argent.
51 (2010), 177–192, [0910.1638 [math.RA]].
V.G. Turaev, Quantum Invariants of Knots and 3-Manifolds, de Gruyter Stud. Math.
18 (2016).
A. Virelizier, Kirby elements and quantum invariants, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 93 (2006)
474–514, [math/0312337 [math.GT]]

