Extended Functorial Field Theories and
Anomalies in Quantum Field Theories

arXiv:2003.08217v1 [math-ph] 18 Mar 2020

Lukas Müller
Submitted for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy

Heriot-Watt University

Department of Mathematics,
School of Mathematical and Computer Sciences.

March, 2020

The copyright in this thesis is owned by the author. Any quotation from the thesis
or use of any of the information contained in it must acknowledge this thesis as the
source of the quotation or information.

Abstract
We develop a general framework for the description of anomalies using extended
functorial field theories extending previous work by Freed and Monnier. In this
framework, anomalies are described by invertible field theories in one dimension
higher and anomalous field theories live on their boundaries.
We provide precise mathematical definitions for all concepts involved using the
language of symmetric monoidal bicategories. In particular, field theories with
anomalies will be described by symmetric monoidal transformations. The use of
higher categorical concepts is necessary to capture the Hamiltonian picture of anomalies. The relation to the path integral and the Hamiltonian description of anomalies
will be explained in detail. Furthermore, we discuss anomaly inflow in detail.
We apply the general framework to the parity anomaly in fermionic systems
coupled to background gauge and gravitational fields on odd-dimensional spacetimes.
We use the extension of the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index theorem to manifolds with
corners due to Loya and Melrose to explicitly construct an extended invertible field
theory encoding the anomaly. This allows us to compute explicitly the 2-cocycle of
the projective representation of the gauge symmetry on the quantum state space,
which is defined in a parity-symmetric way by suitably augmenting the standard
chiral fermionic Fock spaces with Lagrangian subspaces of zero modes of the Dirac
Hamiltonian that naturally appear in the index theorem.
As a second application, we study discrete symmetries of Dijkgraaf-Witten theories and their gauging. Non-abelian group cohomology is used to describe discrete
symmetries and we derive concrete conditions for such a symmetry to admit ’t Hooft
anomalies in terms of the Lyndon-Hochschild-Serre spectral sequence. We give an
explicit realization of a discrete gauge theory with ’t Hooft anomaly as a state on the
boundary of a higher-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten theory using a relative version
of the pushforward construction of Schweigert and Woike.

To everyone who has sparked, encouraged or supported my interest in
mathematics and natural sciences.

Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to thank my advisor Richard Szabo for his guidance and support throughout my PhD, his valuable advice and for giving me the
opportunity to follow my own ideas without ever feeling left alone.
Furthermore, I would like to thank Christoph Schweigert for helpful discussions
related to my research, inviting me to Hamburg multiple times and his constant
support of my academic career.
I am grateful to my other collaborators: to Severin Bunk for explaining various
results and concepts related to bundle gerbes, interesting discussions on mathematical physics in general and organizing the reading group which introduced me to
model categories, to Lóránt Szegedy for a fun collaboration on area dependent field
theories and 2-dimensional Yang-Mills theory and to Lukas Woike, for listening to
all my ideas on physics and mathematics and his valuable input into all my projects.
I would like to thank Ehud Meir for inviting me to Aberdeen and helpful discussions on spectral sequences and topological field theories, and Nathalie Wahl for
showing interest in my work, inviting me to Copenhagen and many interesting discussions on graph models and equivariant field theories.
I would like to thank Simon Lentner, Ingo Runkel, Lennart Schmidt, Thomas
Wasserman and Tim Weelinck for helpful discussions on my research projects.
I am grateful to Lennart Schmidt and Lukas Woike for helpful comments on a
draft of this thesis. I would like to thank all PhD students in the mathematical
physics group at Heriot-Watt University for organising and participating in regular
reading groups on a variety of topics.
I am thankful to Christian Smann and Konrad Waldorf who agreed to be my
examiners.
My work is supported by the Doctoral Training Grant ST/N509099/1 from the
UK Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC).

Contents
1 Introduction
1.1 Anomalies in quantum field theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 Anomalies and symmetry-protected topological phases . . . . . . . .
1.3 Modern perspective on anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.4 Extended functorial field theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.5 Summary of results and outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.6 Conventions and notations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
4
6
6
8
14

2 Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories
16
2.1 Extended functorial field theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
2.1.1 Non-extended field theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2.1.2 A cobordism bicategory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.1.3 The definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
2.2 Description of anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
2.2.1 Relative field theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
2.2.2 Projective anomaly actions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
2.2.3 Anomaly inflow in functorial field theories . . . . . . . . . . . 43
3 The parity anomaly
47
3.1 Index theory part I: the APS-index theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
3.2 Path integral description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
3.3 Index theory part II: manifolds with corners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
3.3.1 b-Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
3.3.2 Loya-Melrose index theorem for manifolds with corners . . . . 60
3.4 The extended index field theory and Hamiltonian description of the
parity anomaly . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
4 ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories
79
4.1 Parallel transport of higher flat gerbes as an invertible homotopy quantum field theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
4.1.1 Simplifications of the cobordism bicategory . . . . . . . . . . . 80
4.1.2 The field theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
4.1.3 Classical Dijkgraaf-Witten theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
i

CONTENTS

4.2

4.3

4.1.4 Quantum Dijkgraaf-Witten theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
4.1.5 Equivariant Dijkgraaf-Witten theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
Discrete symmetries and ’t Hooft anomalies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
4.2.1 Discrete symmetries of Dijkgraaf-Witten theories . . . . . . . 106
4.2.2 Non-abelian group cohomology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
4.2.3 Gauging discrete symmetries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
4.2.4 Obstructions to gauging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
4.2.5 Fully extended TQFT’s and defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Anomalous Dijkgraaf-Witten theories as boundary states . . . . . . . 132
4.3.1 Partition function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
4.3.2 State space from a pushforward construction for relative field
theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134

A Symmetric monoidal bicategories
147
A.1 Basic definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
A.2 Symmetric monoidal bicategories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
B Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration
157
B.1 A model category for groupoids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157
B.2 Stacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
B.3 Integration over essentially finite groupoids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164
Bibliography

167

ii

Chapter 1
Introduction
This thesis is concerned with the mathematical description of anomalies in quantum
field theories. In the introduction we sketch parts of the physical background motivating our work and the mathematical formalism of functorial field theories used
throughout. Afterwards, we give an informal summary of our results.

1.1

Anomalies in quantum field theories

Usually quantum field theories are constructed from classical field theories via a
process called “quantization”. A classical field theory on a manifold M is specified
by a collection of fields F(M ) and a “local” action functional S : F(M ) −→ R
which usually depends on additional geometric structures on M such as a metric
(see e.g. [1, Chapter 5]). The physical states of the system are described by those
field configurations which extremise the action and are usually solutions to a set of
partial differential equations. The set of classical observables O consists of functions
on the space of solutions to these differential equations.1
In the path integral formulation of quantum field theory [5, Chapter 9] the quantum theory corresponding to a classical field theory is formally described by the
integral over the space of classical fields
Z

(1.1)
Z(M ) =
exp ~i S(ψ) Dψ
ψ∈F (M )

and the expectation value of an observable f ∈ O can be computed by inserting the
observable into (1.1):
Z

hf i =
f (ψ) exp ~i S(ψ) Dψ .
(1.2)
ψ∈F (M )
1

In general, the space of solution is a geometrically ill-behaved object and should be replaced by
the derived space of solutions [2]. In physical terms this is related to the BV description of classical
field theories [2–4].

1

Chapter 1: Introduction

These expressions are in general mathematically ill-defined. In perturbative quantum
field theory the path integral can be interpreted as a formal power series in ~ [6].
However, the terms appearing in the perturbation series are divergent in general and
need to be renormalized. A choice of a way to perform this renormalization is called
a renormalization scheme.
The need to renormalize the divergences makes it unclear whether all properties
of a classical field theory continue to hold in the quantum theory. Indeed, it turns out
that symmetries are in general not preserved under quantization. Symmetries of a
classical field theories are transformations of the space of fields which leave the action
invariant. A symmetry is called anomalous if there is no renormalization scheme
which extends the symmetry to the quantum theory. By Noether’s theorem [7] there
is for every classical symmetry a conserved quantity Qµ satisfying (we use Einstein
summation convention)
∂µ Q µ = 0

(1.3)

on solutions to the equations of motion. Anomalies now manifest by a violation of
Equation (1.3)
h∂µ Qµ i = α

(1.4)

in the quantized theory. The function α does depend on the choice of renormalization
scheme, and an anomaly is present if α is non zero in every renormalization scheme.
One of the first examples of an anomaly is the Adler-Bell-Jackiw (ABJ) anomaly [8,
9]. It appears in a quantum field theory defined on R4 equipped with its canonical
Lorentzian metric ηµν of signature (−, +, +, +) and a U (1) background gauge field
Aµ . The dynamical field of the theory is a four component spinor ψµ . The classical
field theory is described by the action
Z
S=
ψ̄γ µ ( i ∂µ + eAµ )ψ ,
(1.5)
R4

where e is the electric charge, γ0 , . . . , γ3 are the usual gamma matrices [5, Section
3.4], ψ̄ = ψ † γ 0 and we used the metric ηµν to raise and lower indices. The action (1.5)
admits the symmetry
ψ 7→ exp( i λγ5 )ψ ,

(1.6)

where γ5 = i γ0 γ1 γ2 γ3 and λ is a real constant. The corresponding conserved current
is
jµ = ψ̄γµ γ5 ψ .

(1.7)

A direct Feynman diagram computation shows [10, Section 4.3.1] that this current
is not preserved at the quantum level:
h∂µ j µ i =

e2 µ,ν,α,β

Fµν Fα,β ,
16π 2
2

(1.8)

Chapter 1: Introduction

where F = d A is the field strength. The ABJ anomaly can be used to explain the
observed decay of a neutral pion into two photons which would be forbidden by the
symmetry otherwise. This shows that anomalies of global symmetries are necessary
to accurately describe physical observations. In contrast gauge symmetries can never
be anomalous in a consistent quantum field theory, since the formulation of gauge
theories depends on the existence of gauge symmetry and it is not possible (even at a
physical level of rigour) to quantize gauge theories with anomalies. Hence all gauge
anomalies need to cancel each other out in physically reasonable theories. This poses
some restrictions on the properties of the matter content in the standard model, see
e.g. [10, Section 4.9].
In Chapter 2 we will develop a framework for the mathematical description of
anomalies using functorial field theories. We will illustrate this general framework
in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 by applying it to two examples. The first example will
be the parity anomaly of chiral gauge theories on odd dimensional spacetimes. On
the 3 dimensional manifold M = R3 the parity anomaly takes the following form:
Equation (1.5) can be adapted to 3 dimensions by replacing the 4-dimensional gamma
matrices with their 3-dimensional version:
Z
/ ,
S=
ψ̄ Dψ
(1.9)
R3

/ = γ µ ( i ∂µ + eAµ ). This theory admits a time-reversal
with the Dirac operator D
symmetry T ψ(t, x, y) = γ0 ψ(−t, x1 , x2 ) which turns out to be anomalous. So far
our discussion took place in Lorentzian signature. However, for the derivation of
the parity anomaly on arbitrary spacetimes Euclidean signature is more convenient
and we will use it from now on. Formally, the path integral on a spin manifold M
equipped with a background gauge field is the determinant of the Dirac operator
Y
/ =
Z(M, Aµ ) = det(D)
λ .
(1.10)
/
λ∈spec(D)

Orientation reversal acts on the partition function by complex conjugation. Since
/ are real, the path integral is formally invariant with respect
all eigenvalues of D
to this symmetry. However, the determinant in Equation (1.10) is divergent and
hence needs to be renormalized. The parity anomaly now manifests itself as the
statement that it is impossible to renormalise the determinant in such a way that
the path integral is real and invariant under gauge transformations. Let us fix a
renormalization such that Z(M, Aµ ) is real and positive for a fixed background gauge
field Aµ . Furthermore, let A0µ be an equivalent gauge field. We can compute the sign
difference between Z(M, Aµ ) and Z(M, A0µ ) by following the path (1 − t)Aµ + tA0µ
in the space of background fields and changing the sign every time an eigenvalue of
/ passes through zero. In general, this “spectral flow” might lead to a non-trivial
D
sign change breaking gauge invariance. The spectral flow can be computed from the
index of a Dirac operator on the mapping torus constructed from [0, 1]×M by gluing
3

Chapter 1: Introduction

the ends together using the gauge transformation to construct a background gauge
field on S 1 × M [11].
The second class of anomalies we study are ’t Hooft anomalies of Dijkgraaf-Witten
theories. Dijkgraaf-Witten theories are gauge theories with finite gauge group D.
The space of fields is the space BunD (M ) of principal D-bundles which automatically carry a unique connection, since the Lie algebra of D is 0. The space of gauge
equivalence classes of principal D-bundles is finite which makes it possible to define the path integral (1.1) without the need to remove infinities. For this reason
any classical symmetry can be extended to the quantum theory. However, these
symmetries can still have ’t Hooft anomalies [12]. ’t Hooft anomalies are slightly
different in flavour to the anomalies discussed above. There is no problem in extending a symmetry with ’t Hooft anomaly to a global symmetry of the quantum theory.
However, the anomaly is an obstruction to gauging the symmetry, i.e. coupling the
theory to non-trivial background gauge fields for the symmetry group. Hence these
anomalies are only visible in non-trivial backgrounds. Dijkgraaf-Witten theories can
be mathematically rigorously defined and hence provide an ideal toy model for the
mathematical study of ’t Hooft anomalies.
In the Hamiltonian picture of quantum field theory anomalies manifest themself in
terms of a projective representation of the symmetry group on the Hilbert space H of
the theory [13]. In principle, projective symmetry actions do not cause any problems
in a quantum theory since a physical state is described by a ray in the Hilbert space.
However, a projective action of a gauge symmetry makes it impossible to implement
the Gauss law, which states that physical states need to be invariant under the action
of the gauge symmetry on the Hilbert space. This is the Hamiltonian analogue of
the statement that gauge theories with anomalous gauge symmetry are inconsistent.

1.2

Anomalies and symmetry-protected topological phases

At the end of the last century it was realised that quantum phases of matter exist
which cannot be described by Landau’s theory of symmetry breaking. Instead, these
phases can be distinguished by ‘topological order’ parameters which prevent them
from being deformed to a trivial system whose ground state is a factorized state.
Recently, there has been renewed interest in anomalies, because of their relation
to these topological phases of matter. The structures studied in this thesis are
closely related to and motivated by the point of view on anomalies in the context of
condensed matter physics.
Since their discovery over 30 years ago, immense progress in understanding and
classifying topological phases has been made. For instance, there exists a classification for non-interacting gapped systems in terms of twisted equivariant K-theory [14]
(see also [15]).
A fruitful approach to the study of gapped interacting systems is to consider the
4

Chapter 1: Introduction

effective low-energy (long-range) continuum theory of a lattice Hamiltonian model.
Usually these field theories are topological. A famous example is the effective description of the integer quantum Hall effect in terms of Chern-Simons gauge theory.
In this sense a gapped quantum phase may be thought of as a path-connected component of the moduli stack of topological quantum field theories. However, in the
interacting case no complete classification exists. For this reason one usually restricts to tractable subclasses. Anomalies in n-dimensional field theories are closely
related to ‘short-range entangled’ phases [16] in n + 1-dimensions. A gapped phase
Ψ is short-range entangled if there exists a phase Ψ−1 such that the ‘stacked’ phase
Ψ ⊗ Ψ−1 can be deformed by an adiabatic transformation of the Hamiltonian to a
trivial product state without closing the energy gap between the ground state and
the first excited state. The stacking operation of topological phases corresponds to
the tensor product of their low-energy effective topological field theories. A topological field theory is called invertible if it admits an inverse with respect to the tensor
product. This observation motivates a classification of short-range entangled phases
in terms of invertible topological field theories [17, 18].
Let G be a group. In the case of an additional global G-symmetry, a nontrivial short-range entangled phase may be trivial when the symmetry is ignored.
Such a phase is called ‘G-symmetry-protected’ [16, 19]. A G-symmetry-protected
phase can be understood by studying its topological response to non-trivial background G-gauge fields, which is called ‘gauging’ the G-symmetry. For a finite symmetry group G, the low-energy effective field theories are G-equivariant topological field theories [20]. The correspondence between topological field theories and
symmetry-protected topological phases of matter is discussed in e.g. [11, 20–22].
Classical Dijkgraaf-Witten theories provide a particularly tractable class of invertible G-equivariant topological field theories. The corresponding lattice Hamiltonian models have been constructed in e.g. [23–26]. They are classified by group
cohomology. The corresponding classification of topological phases is called group
cohomological classification [27]. However, this is not a complete classification of
symmetry-protected phases and more refined classifications have been proposed, see
e.g. [18, 20, 28, 29].
An essential feature of symmetry-protected topological phases is that they exhibit ‘topologically protected’ boundary states. These boundary states can be effectively described by anomalous quantum field theories. The gapped bulk system
is then characterised by gapless boundary states, such as the chiral quantum Hall
edge states, which exhibit gauge or gravitational anomalies; conversely, an n − 1dimensional system whose ground state topological order is anomalous can only
exist as the boundary of an n-dimensional topological phase. While the boundary
quantum field theory on its own suffers from anomalies, the symmetry-protected
boundary states are described by considering the anomalous theory ‘relative’ to the
higher-dimensional bulk theory, where it becomes a non-anomalous quantum field
theory under the ‘bulk-boundary correspondence’ [30, 31] in which the boundary
states undertake anomaly inflow from the bulk field theory [32, 33]. The standard
5

Chapter 1: Introduction

examples are provided by topological insulators corresponding to the parity anomaly
which are protected by fermion number conservation and time-reversal symmetry
(G = U (1) × Z2 ) [34, 35]. The presence of non-trivial global anomalies forces the
boundary theory to be non-trivial and topologically protected. Reversing this logic,
it follows that n+1-dimensional invertible field theories should classify the possible
anomalies in n dimensions [21].

1.3

Modern perspective on anomalies

In the situations just described, a field theory with anomaly is well-defined as a
theory living on the boundary of an invertible quantum field theory in one dimension
higher. The modern perspective on anomalies is that anomalies in n − 1-dimensional
quantum field theories can be completely described by invertible n-dimensional field
theories [11, 36–38]. We have already seen a glance of this correspondence when
we related the parity anomaly to the index of the Dirac operator on a mapping
torus in one dimension higher. This perspective has the advantage that tools from
the study of invertible field theories can be applied to anomalies. For example, the
partition function of an invertible field theory is a cobordism invariant [39, 40]: two ndimensional manifolds M and M 0 with background fields are cobordant if there exist
an n+1-dimensional manifold X such that ∂X = M t−M 0 and the background fields
on M and M 0 can be extended to X. The cobordism group Ωn (F), depending on
the background fields F, consists of equivalence classes of cobordant manifolds. The
multiplication is given by the disjoint union of manifolds. The partition function of an
invertible field theory can now be described by a group homomorphism Ωn (F) −→
U (1). This perspective is extremely helpful in arguing that certain anomaly field
theories are trivial, because one only needs to check that the partition function
vanishes on a hopefully simple set of generators of Ωn (F). In practice it is even often
possible to show that Ωn (F) is zero and hence all anomalies vanish. Furthermore
there are powerful algebraic tools for the computation of cobordism groups, such as
the Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence [41]. We refer to [42] for recent applications
of these ideas to particle physics and to [43, 44] for applications to M-theory.
Knowledge of the partition function of the invertible field theory is enough to
show the absence of anomalies. However, to provide a concrete description of a
theory with anomaly, such as the boundary states of a topological phase of matter,
further information about the theory is required. In the next section we introduce
the mathematical formulation of functorial field theories used throughout this thesis
and sketch how anomalies can be described in this framework.

1.4

Extended functorial field theories

Functorial (quantum) field theory is one attempt to mathematically rigorously capture (some of) the structures of quantum field theory. The idea is to give an axiomatic
6

Chapter 1: Introduction

framework for the partition function and state space of a quantum field theory. Recall, that formally the partition function Z(M ) on an n-dimensional manifold M is
calculated by the Feynman path integral of an exponentiated action functional over
the space of dynamical field configurations on M ; so far there is no mathematically
well-defined theory of such path integration in general. The axioms of functorial field
theories are derived from the properties that such an integration would satisfy in the
case that the action functional is an integral of a local Lagrangian density on M .2
A quantum field theory should also assign a Hilbert space of states Z(Σ) to every
n−1-dimensional manifold Σ. They satisfy Z(Σ t Σ0 ) ∼
= Z(Σ) ⊗C Z(Σ0 ), i.e. the state
space of non-interacting systems is given by the tensor product of the corresponding
Hilbert spaces. In any quantum field theory there exists a time evolution operator
(propagator)
Z([t0 , t1 ] × Σ) : Z(Σ) −→ Z(Σ)

(1.11)

from time t0 to t1 . We think of this operator as associated to the cylinder [t0 , t1 ] × Σ.
They satisfy Z([t1 , t2 ] × Σ) ◦ Z([t0 , t1 ] × Σ) = Z([t0 , t2 ] × Σ). The path integral should
also allow for the construction of a more general operator Z(M ) : Z(Σ− ) −→ Z(Σ+ )
for every manifold M with boundary Σ− t Σ+ , such that the gluing of manifolds
corresponds to the composition of linear maps. Such a manifold is called a cobordism
from Σ− to Σ+ .
These considerations motivate the definition of a functorial field theory, generalising Atiyah’s definition of topological field theories [45] and Segal’s definition of
conformal field theories [46], as a symmetric monoidal functor
Z : CobF
n −→ HilbC ,

(1.12)

where CobF
n is a category modelling physical spacetimes with non-dynamical background fields F and HilbC is the category of complex Hilbert spaces. Roughly
speaking, CobF
n contains closed n−1-dimensional manifolds with background fields
as objects, and as morphisms the n-dimensional cobordisms as well as additional
limit morphisms corresponding to diffeomorphisms which are compatible with the
background fields. The additional morphisms encode symmetries. We give a precise
definition in Section 2.1.1. Evaluating Z on a closed n-dimensional manifold M gives
rise to a linear map C ∼
= Z(∅) −→ Z(∅) ∼
= C which can be identified with a complex
number Z(M ), the partition function of Z on M . From a mathematical standpoint
this definition can be thought of as a prescription for computing a manifold invariant Z(M ) by cutting manifolds into simpler pieces and studying the quantum field
theory on these pieces.
We now turn our attention to the description of anomalies. The partition function of an n−1-dimensional quantum field theory Z with anomaly described by an
invertible field theory A : CobF
n −→ HilbC on an n−1-dimensional manifold Σ takes
2

In the case of discrete gauge theory there exists a well-defined integration theory (see for
example Appendix B) which satisfies the axioms of a functorial field theory.

7

Chapter 1: Introduction

values in the one-dimensional vector space A(Σ), instead of C. It is possible to pick
a non-canonical isomorphism A(Σ) ∼
= C to identify the partition function with a
complex number. The group of symmetries acts non-trivially on A(Σ) encoding the
breaking of the symmetry in the quantum field theory Z.
To also incorporate the description of the state space of Z on an n−2-dimensional
manifold S we need to promote A to an extended field theory which assigns C-linear
categories to n−2-dimensional manifolds such that the anomalous state space Z(S)
can be considered as an object of A(S). In other words, A should be an extended
functorial field theory, i.e. a symmetric monoidal 2-functor
A : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC ,

(1.13)

F
where CobF
n,n−1,n−2 is a bicategorical extension of Cobn ; see Section 2.1.2 for details.
There are different possible choices for the target bicategory. For simplicity we
restrict ourselves to Kapranov-Voevodsky(KV) 2-vector spaces [47].
Requiring that A is an invertible field theory implies that there is a non-canonical
equivalence of categories A(S) ∼
= VectC which allows one to identify the state space
of the anomalous theory with a vector space. We can subsume the ideas sketched
above in the following concise definition: A quantum field theory with anomaly is a
natural symmetric monoidal 2-transformation

Z : 1 =⇒ tr A

(1.14)

between a trivial field theory and a certain truncation of A; see Section 2.2 for
details. This formalism allows one to compute the 2-cocycle twisting the projective
representation of the symmetry group on the state space completely in terms of the
extended field theory A [37]. Anomalous theories formulated in this way are a special
case of relative field theories [48] and are closely related to twisted quantum field
theories [49, 50]. The present thesis develops this framework for the description of
anomalies via functorial field theories following previous work by [36, 37] and applies
it to the two examples mentioned in Section 1.1. We shall now give an overview of
our constructions and findings.

1.5

Summary of results and outline

In Chapter 2 which is based on the publications [51, 52], we develop the general
theory underlying the following examples. In the first part of the chapter we define extended functorial field theories. One of the technical difficulties related to
giving a concrete definition is the construction of the higher cobordism category
equipped with additional structure. For cobordisms with tangential structure there
exists an (∞, n)-categorical definition [53, 54]. A categorical version with arbitrary
background fields taking into account families of manifolds has been defined by Stolz
and Teichner [49]. A bicategory of cobordisms equipped with elements of topological stacks is constructed in [55]. One of the main technical accomplishments of
8

Chapter 1: Introduction

this part of Chapter 2 is the explicit construction of a geometric cobordism bicategory CobF
n,n−1,n−2 which includes arbitrary background fields in the form of a general
stack3 F (Section 2.1.2). Although this is only a slight generalisation of previous
constructions, it is still quite technically complicated, and its explicit form makes all
of our statements precise. We show how the definition of an extended functorial field
theory as a 2-functor
Z : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC

(1.15)

encodes some of the properties of quantum field theories with a focus on the implementation of symmetries via limit morphisms. We use the symmetric monoidal
bicategory 2VectC of KV 2-vector spaces as the target for our field theories. A KV
2-vector space is an additive semi-simple C-linear category with finitely many isomorphism classes of simple objects.
Building on this bicategory, we then use the theory of symmetric monoidal bicategories following [55] and the ideas of [37] to work out the concrete form of the anomalous quantum field theories sketched above; this is described in Section 2.2. We will
show in Corollary 2.87 that a field theory with trivial anomaly A ∼
= 1 is nothing but
an ordinary field theory. In Section 2.2.2 we explain the relation to more traditional
approaches to the description of anomalies in terms of non-trivial line bundles and
gerbes over the space of field configurations. Furthermore, the relation to projective
representations of the gauge group in [37], and its extension to projective groupoid
representations following [56], will be explained. We conclude Chapter 2 with an abstract description of anomaly inflow, i.e. the coupling of bulk and boundary degrees
of freedom, at the level of partition functions and state spaces in Section 2.2.3: let
M be a manifold with boundary ∂M = Σ and Z : 1 =⇒ tr A an anomalous quantum
field theory with anomaly theory A : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC . The partition function of Z on Σ is an element Z(Σ) ∈ A(Σ). Evaluating the anomaly field theory A
on M induces a linear map A(M ) : A(Σ) −→ A(∅) ∼
= C. This allows us to define the
partition function of the combined system as the complex number A(M )[Z(Σ)] ∈ C.
Similarly, the state space of Z on an n − 2-dimensional manifold S is an element of
the linear category A(S) and the choice of a manifold Σ with boundary ∂Σ = −S
allows us to define a combined state space A(Σ)[Z(S)] ∈ A(∅) ∼
= VectC . Proposition 2.109 and Theorem 2.118 show that the combined system does not suffer from
any anomalies. The coupling of bulk and boundary degrees of freedom depends on
the full quantum field theory A describing the anomaly and not just its truncation.
Chapter 3 is concerned with the construction of a concrete example of this general
formalism describing the parity anomaly in odd spacetime dimensions and is based on
the publication [51]. As the parity anomaly is related to an index in one dimension
higher [11, 57, 58], this suggests that quantum field theories with parity anomaly
should take values in an extended field theory constructed from index theory.4 We
3

In [48] the more general situation of simplicial sheaves is considered.
This naturally fits in with the classification of topological insulators and superconductors using
index theory and K-theory, see [59] for a recent exposition of this.
4

9

Chapter 1: Introduction

build such a theory using the index theory for manifolds with corners developed
in [60, 61], which extends the well-known Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index theorem [62]
to manifolds with corners of codimension 2. Our construction produces an extended
quantum field theory Aζparity depending on a complex parameter ζ ∈ C× in any even
spacetime dimension n; for ζ = −1 this theory describes the parity anomaly in odd
spacetime dimensions.
To exemplify how our constructions fit into the usual treatments of the parity anomaly from the path integral perspective, we first consider in Section 3.2
the simpler construction of an ordinary (unextended) invertible quantum field theory CobF
n −→ VectC from the usual Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index theorem for evendimensional manifolds with boundary reviewed in Section 3.1. We show that the
ζ
definition of the partition function Zparity
as a natural symmetric monoidal transζ
formation implies that the complex number Zparity
(M ) transforms under a gauge
transformation φ : M −→ M by multiplication with a 1-cocycle of the gauge group
given by ζ to a power determined by the index of the Dirac operator on the corresponding mapping cylinder M(φ). For ζ = −1 this is precisely the same gauge
anomaly that arises from the spectral flow of edge states under adiabatic evolution
signalling the presence of the global parity anomaly [11, 58, 63], which is a result of
the sign ambiguity in the definition of the fermion path integral in odd spacetime
dimension as explained in Section 1.1. We further illustrate how the bulk-boundary
correspondence from Section 2.2.3 recovers a construction from [11].
A key feature of the Hamiltonian formalism defined by our construction of the
extended quantum field theory Aζparity is that the index of a Dirac operator on a
manifold with corners (which we recall in Section 3.3) depends on the choice of a
unitary self-adjoint chirality-odd endomorphism of the kernel of the induced Dirac
operator on all corners, whose positive eigenspace defines a Lagrangian subspace of
the kernel with respect to its natural symplectic structure. We assemble all possible
choices into a linear category Aζparity (S) assigned to n − 2-dimensional manifolds
S by Aζparity . The index theorem for manifolds with corners splits into a sum of
a bulk integral over the Atiyah-Singer curvature form and boundary contributions
depending on the endomorphisms. We use these boundary terms to define the theory
Aζparity on 1-morphisms, i.e. on n − 1-dimensional manifolds Σ; the general idea is to
use categorical coends5 to treat all possible boundary conditions at the same time.
The index theorem then induces a natural transformation between linear functors,
defining the theory Aζparity on 2-morphisms, i.e. on n-dimensional manifolds.
A crucial ingredient in the construction of the invertible extended field theory
Aζparity in Section 3.4 is a natural linear map
ΦT0 ,T1 (Σ0 , Σ1 ) : Aζparity (Σ1 ) ◦ Aζparity (Σ0 )(T0 ) −→ Aζparity (Σ1 ◦ Σ0 )(T0 )

(1.16)

for every pair of 1-morphisms Σ0 : S0 −→ S1 and Σ1 : S1 −→ S2 with corresponding
endomorphisms Ti on the corner manifolds Si ; it forms the components of a natural
5

We will define coends in Section 3.4.

10

Chapter 1: Introduction

linear isomorphism Φ which is associative. A lot of information about the parity
anomaly is contained in this map. The construction of Aζparity allows us to fix endomorphisms for concrete calculations and still have a theory which is independent of
ζ
these choices. Viewing a field theory with parity anomaly as a theory Zparity
relative
ζ
to Aparity in the sense explained before, we then get a vector space of quantum states
ζ
Zparity
(S) ∈ Aζparity for every n − 2-dimensional manifold S; the groupoid of gauge
transformations Sym(S) only acts projectively on this space. Denoting this projective representation by ρ, for any pair of gauge transformations φ1 , φ2 : S −→ S one
finds

ρ(φ2 ) ◦ ρ(φ1 ) = ΦT1 ,T2 M(φ1 ), M(φ2 ) ρ(φ2 ◦ φ1 ) ,
(1.17)
where M(φi ) is the mapping cylinder of φi . Using results of [64, 65], we can calculate the corresponding 2-cocycle αφ1 ,φ2 appearing in the conventional Hamiltonian
description of anomalies [66–68] in terms of the action of gauge transformations on
Lagrangian subspaces of the kernel of the Dirac Hamiltonian on S; the explicit expression can be found in Equation (3.126).
In Chapter 4, which is based on the publications [52, 69], we give a mathematical description of symmetries of Dijkgraaf-Witten theories and their gauging in
the framework of functorial field theory which is motivated by physical considerations [12]. Let D be a finite group and n a natural number. The possible topological
actions for n-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten theories with gauge group D are classified by the group cohomology of D or equivalently by the singular cohomology of
the classifying space BD with coefficients in U (1) [70, 71]. Let ω ∈ Z n (BD; U (1))
be an n-cocycle and M an n-dimensional manifold. Let P be a D-gauge field on M
with classifying map ψP : M −→ BD. The action of the Dijkgraaf-Witten theory
Eω evaluated at P is given by
Z
ψP∗ ω .
exp(2π i SDW ) :=
(1.18)
M

The quantum theory can be defined by appropriately summing over isomorphism
classes of D-bundles. We present a construction of (equivariant) Dijkgraaf-Witten
theories as extended functorial field theories from the parallel transport of higher flat
gerbes in Section 4.1 using the orbifold construction of Schweigert and Woike [72, 73].
The classical field theory will be defined on the bordism category D-Cobn,n−1,n−2 constructed by specifying the background fields F to consist of orientations and principal
D-bundles described by maps into BD. The only background structure required for
the quantum theory is an orientation. We also analyse the algebraic structures underlying the resulting extended functorial field theory in 2 and 3-dimensions. We will
show that in 2-dimensions the gauge theory is completely described by the ω-twisted
representation theory of D. In 3-dimensions the theory can be described in terms of
the representation theory of the ω-twisted Drinfeld double of D [74, 75].
In Section 4.2 we study discrete symmetries of Dijkgraaf-Witten theories. In
general, a physical symmetry group G acts on gauge fields only up to gauge transformations. Since for finite gauge groups, gauge transformations can be naturally
11

Chapter 1: Introduction

identified with homotopies of classifying maps, we define such an action as a homotopy coherent action of G on BD (Definition 4.143). We show that, up to equivalence,
homotopy coherent actions on BD are described by non-abelian group 2-cocycles.
If D is abelian, this description agrees with [12]. Non-abelian 2-cocycles classify
extensions of G by D:
ι
λ
b −→
1 −→ D −→ G
G −→ 1 .

(1.19)

This extension has a natural physical interpretation: It describes how to combine Db
and G-gauge fields into a single G-gauge
field. When the extension is non-trivial, i.e.
b is not a product group D×G, one says that the G-symmetry is ‘fractionalized’ [76].
G
A homotopy coherent action on BD induces a homotopy coherent action on the
collection of classical D-gauge theories. Homotopy fixed points of this action are
defined to be classical field theories with G-symmetry (Definition 4.148). An essential feature of homotopy fixed points is that they are a structure, not a property.
In Proposition 4.154 we show that if the topological action is preserved by the action of G (Definition 4.151), then the corresponding Dijkgraaf-Witten theory can be
equipped with a homotopy fixed point structure.
An internal symmetry of a quantum field theory acts on its Hilbert space of states.
This motivates the definition of a functorial quantum field theory with internal Gsymmetry as a functor
CobF
n −→ G-Rep

(1.20)

to the category G-Rep of representations of G. We show in Proposition 4.162 that
classical symmetries of Dijkgraaf-Witten theories induce internal symmetries of the
quantized theory. This shows that discrete gauge theories are anomaly-free in the
sense that all symmetries extend to the quantum level.
’t Hooft anomalies appear as an obstruction to gauging the G-symmetry, i.e. to
coupling it to non-trivial background gauge fields (Definition 4.192). Gauging the
b
G-symmetry can be achieved by finding a topological action ω
b for a G-gauge
theory
which restricts to ω and performing a path integral over D-gauge fields. Mathematically, this can be described by the equivariant Dijkgraaf-Witten theories introduced
in Section 4.1.5. In Theorem 4.196 we prove that the equivariant Dijkgraaf-Witten
theory corresponding to ω
b gauges the G-symmetry. We discuss the gauging of discrete symmetries in Section 4.2.3.
However, in general it might be impossible to find a topological action which
restricts correctly. In this case we say that the corresponding symmetry has a ’t Hooft
anomaly. The obstructions for ω
b to exist are encoded in the Lyndon-Hochschild-Serre
spectral sequence. For an n-dimensional field theory there are n obstructions which
need to vanish. In Proposition 4.243 we show that if all obstructions except the last
one vanish then there exists an n+1-dimensional topological action θ for a discrete
b U (1)) satisfying ι∗ ω 0 = ω
G-gauge theory, together with an n-cochain ω 0 in C n (B G;
and δω 0 = λ∗ θ. These obstructions are studied in Section 4.2.4. In Section 4.2.5 we
12

Chapter 1: Introduction

present some ideas on possible interpretations of the obstructions from the point of
view of fully extended topological quantum field theories and defects.
Based on a relative version of the push construction from [72] we construct a
boundary quantum field theory Zω0 encoding the anomaly in Section 4.3 if all obb −→ G be a group homomorphism
structions beside the last one vanish. Let λ : G
and Z1 , Z2 : G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC extended field theories. The group homob
morphism λ induces a 2-functor λ : G-Cob
n,n−1,n−2 −→ G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 . The relative
push construction allows us to construct from a relative field theory Z : tr λ∗ Z1 =⇒
tr λ∗ Z2 a relative field theory λ∗ Z : tr Z1 =⇒ tr Z2 . In the case that Z1 = Z2 = 1
this construction reduces to the one given in [72]. The relative push construction is a
bit involved and hence we refer to Section 4.3.2 for details. However, let us give an informal description
of the partition function of Zω0 here. The fact that ω 0 is not closed
R
b
implies that M ψP∗b ω 0 is not gauge-invariant for a general G-bundle
Pb on M . Under
R
a gauge transformation b
h : Pb −→ Pb0 the value of M ψP∗b ω 0 changes by multiplication
R
b We can
with6 [0,1]×M b
h∗ δω 0 , where we consider b
h as a homotopy [0, 1] × M −→ B G.
R
rewrite this integral as
(λ∗b
h )∗ θ. This is exactly the value of Eθ evaluated on
[0,1]×M

λ∗ b
h, which shows that the anomaly is controlled by the bulk classical gauge theory
Eθ . The rough idea for the construction of Zω0 is to modify the partial orbifold
construction used in Section 4.2.3 in a way suited to the construction of boundary
states. Let us fix a G-bundle P on M . To define the partition function we want to
perform an integration over the preimage of P under λ∗ . However, in the presence of
gauge transformations, requiring two bundles to be the same is not natural. Hence
b
we use the homotopy fibre λ−1
∗ [P ] as a groupoid with objects given by pairs (P , h)
b
of a G-bundle
Pb and a gauge transformation h : λ∗ Pb −→ P . Morphisms are gauge
transformations b
h : Pb −→ Pb0 which are compatible with h and h0 . We show that
Z
Z
∗
0
Zω0 (M ) :=
ψPb ω
h∗ θ
(1.21)
M

[0,1]×M

is gauge-invariant with respect to morphisms in λ−1
∗ [P ]. We define the partition
7
function of Zω0 on M as
Z
Lω0 (M ) .
(1.22)
Zω0 (M ) :=
λ−1
∗ [P ]

The state space of the anomalous theory is constructed in Section 4.3.2. The groupoid
of symmetries acts only projectively on this state space. Using Theorem 4.95 we
show that the 2-cocycle twisting this projective representation is the transgression
of θ to the groupoid of G-bundles. With this construction we provide an explicit
demonstration of the anomaly inflow mechanism developed in Section 2.2.3 at the
6

This integral is not actually well-defined as a complex number, see Section 4.1.4 for details. We
ignore this subtlety in the present section.
7
We recall integration over essentially finite groupoids in Appendix B.

13

Chapter 1: Introduction

level of both partition functions and state spaces, which renders the composite bulkboundary field theory free from anomalies.
Appendix A outlines the basic definitions and our conventions related to symmetric monoidal bicategories. In Appendix B we collect some background material
on the canonical model structure on the category of groupoids, homotopy (co)limits,
stacks and integration over finite groupoids. Model categorical language is not required to understand the main part of the thesis as long as the reader is willing
to accept the concrete models for homotopy fibres and pullbacks provided without
derivation.

1.6

Conventions and notations

For the convenience of the reader, we summarise here our notation and conventions
which are used throughout this paper.
• We denote by VectC the symmetric monoidal category of finite-dimensional
complex vector spaces.
• We denote by 2VectC the symmetric monoidal bicategory of KV 2-vector spaces.
• We denote by HilbC the symmetric monoidal category of complex Hilbert
spaces.
• We denote by Grp the category of groups.
• We denote by Grpd the 2-category of (small) groupoids.
• We denote by Cat the bicategory of (small) categories.
• We denote by CobF
n the symmetric monoidal category of n-dimensional geometric cobordisms with background fields F .
• We denote by CobF
n,n−1,n−2 the symmetric monoidal bicategory of n-dimensional
geometric cobordisms with background fields F .
• Let G be a group. We denote by BG the classifying space of G, which for finite
G is an Eilenberg-MacLane space K(G, 1), i.e. its only non-trivial homotopy
group is π1 (BG) = G. Let P be a principal G-bundle on a manifold M . We
denote by ψP : M −→ BG the corresponding classifying map.
• Let T be a topological space, n a positive integer and A an abelian group. We
denote the pairing of chains and cochains on T by h · , · i : C n (T ; A)×Cn (T ) −→
A.
• Let G be a group. The groupoid of G-bundles on a manifold M is denoted by
BunG (M ).
• Most constructions in this thesis are done in a fixed dimension n. For such a
fixed dimension, we use M , Σ and S to denote manifolds of dimensions n, n − 1
and n − 2, respectively.
• Let M be an oriented manifold. We denote by −M the same manifold equipped
with the opposite orientation.
• Let C be a monoidal category. We denote by ∗//C the bicategory with one
object and C as endomorphisms.

14

Chapter 1: Introduction

• Let λ : G −→ G0 be a homomorphism of groups. We denote the induced maps
BG −→ BG0 and ∗//G −→ ∗//G0 again by λ.
R
• Let F : C −→ C 0 be a functor. We write the limit of F as an end C F .
• Let G be a finite group. We denote by G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 the bicategory of cobordisms equipped with maps into BG.

15

Chapter 2
Description of anomalies via
extended functorial quantum field
theories
In this chapter we will develop a general framework for the description of anomalies
using extended functorial quantum field theories following and extending previous
work [36, 37]. In Section 2.1 we provide the necessary definitions before turning
to anomalies in Section 2.2. We focus on the abstract description and postpone
the discussion of non-trivial examples to later chapters. We will heavily use the
language of symmetric monoidal bicategories. For our conventions concerning (and
details about) symmetric monoidal bicategories see Appendix A.

2.1

Extended functorial field theories

Quantum field theories are usually defined on smooth manifolds equipped with additional structure, such as an orientation or a metric. We call the additional nondynamical structures required to define a specific quantum field theory background
fields. These fields should be local, i.e. they form a sheaf (or higher versions thereof)
on the category of manifolds, and can have (higher) internal symmetries such as
gauge symmetries. We thus incorporate all data of background fields such as bundles with connections, spin structures and metrics into a stack F : Manop
n −→ Grpd
on the category Mann of n-dimensional manifolds with corners and local diffeomorphisms; we regard Mann as a 2-category with only trivial 2-morphisms, and Grpd
denotes the 2-category of small groupoids, functors and natural isomorphisms. One
should think of elements of F (M ) as the collection of classical background fields on
M , which in particular satisfies the sheaf condition, i.e. for every open cover {Ua } of
a manifold M , the diagram
Y
Y
Y
−→
F (M ) −→
F (Ua ) −→
F (Ua ∩ Ub ) −→
F (Ua ∩ Ub ∩ Uc )
−→
−→
a

a,b

a,b,c

16

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

is a weak/homotopy equalizer diagram in Grpd. In Appendix B.2 we review some
basic facts and definitions related to stacks. The site we use to define stacks differs
from the one usually used in the context of differential geometry. It contains local
diffeomorphisms as morphisms instead of arbitrary smooth maps. The reason for
this is that we want to be able to describe structures such as metrics or orientations
which cannot be pulled back along general smooth maps. Even-though desirable for
applications to higher gauge theory, we decided not to work with higher stacks since
they are not necessary to capture the examples discussed in this thesis.
Throughout this chapter we fix a spacetime dimension n ∈ N>0 and a stack F
defined on n-dimensional manifolds describing the classical background fields of the
theory under consideration. Usually, F is a product of different types of fields.
Common types appearing in physics are orientations, Riemannian metrics, principal
bundles with connections and spin structures. Note that most of these structures
are actually sheaves considered as stacks with only identity automorphisms.
Remark 2.1. Throughout this thesis we will ignore the following technical point:
background fields on a manifold usually form smooth (infinite dimensional) manifolds and hence one should work with smooth stacks and at various points demand
constructions to depend smoothly on the background gauge fields. This can be achieved
by working with (bi)categories fibred over the category of smooth manifolds [49].

2.1.1

Non-extended field theories

Before defining extended functorial quantum field theories we briefly recall the nonextended definition [36, 49, 77]. To model physical spacetimes with background
fields, we introduce a symmetric monoidal category CobF
n whose objects are triples
(Σ, , fΣ ∈ F ((−, ) × Σ)), where Σ is an n − 1-dimensional closed manifold with
connected components Σ1 , . . . , Σl ,  = (1 , . . . l ) is an l-tuple of positive real numbers
and f an element constant along (−, ) of F ((−, )×Σ). Here we use the shorthand
notation
(−, ) × Σ := tli=1 (−i , i ) × Σi .

(2.2)

The precise definition of a constant element is not so important for the moment; it
is enough to have the example of a structure which is pulled back from Σ or a metric
of the form dt2 + gΣ in mind. We will give a definition in Definition 2.33.
Before defining the morphisms of CobF
n we introduce:
Definition 2.3. Let M1 and M2 be manifolds equipped with background fields f1 ∈
F (M1 ) and f2 ∈ F (M2 ). A F -diffeomorphism (M1 , f1 ) −→ (M2 , f2 ) consists of a
diffeomorphism ϕ : M1 −→ M2 together with a morphism ϕ∗ f2 −→ f1 in F (M1 ).
There are two types of morphisms in CobF
n . The first type is given by equivalence classes of n-dimensional cobordisms with background fields. A cobordism with
background fields (Σ− , − , fΣ− ) −→ (Σ+ , + , fΣ+ ) is a 4-tuple
(M, fM ∈ F (M ), ϕ− : [0, − ) × Σ− −→ M− , ϕ+ : (−+ , 0] × Σ+ −→ M+ )
17

(2.4)

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

where M is an n-dimensional compact manifold with boundary, fM is a background
field on M , M− ∪M+ is a collar the boundary of M , i.e. an open neighbourhood which
is diffeomorphic to [0, 1)×∂M of and ϕ− and ϕ+ are F -diffeomorphisms. Two cobordisms with background fields (M, f, ϕ− , ϕ+ ) and (M 0 , f 0 , ϕ0− , ϕ0+ ) from (Σ− , − , fΣ− )
to (Σ+ , + , fΣ+ ) are equivalent if there exists a F -diffeomorphism ψ : M −→ M 0
compatible with the collars. Concretely, this means that the diagram
M
ϕ+

ϕ−

[0, − ) × Σ−

ψ

ϕ0−

M

0

(2.5)

(−+ , 0] × Σ+
ϕ0+

of F -diffeomorphisms commutes. We refer to morphisms described by equivalence
M0

M

ϕ+

ϕ0−
ϕ0+

ϕ−

[0, a )×Σa

M0 ◦ M

(−b , 0]×Σb

[0, b )×Σb

(−c , 0]×Σc

ϕ−

[0, a )×Σa

ϕ0+

(−c , 0]×Σc

Figure 2.1: Illustration of two composable regular morphisms in CobF
n (on the left) and
their composition (on the right).

classes of cobordisms with background fields as regular morphisms.
The second class of morphisms (Σa , a , fΣa ) −→ (Σb , b , fΣb ) is only defined for
a = b and consist of a diffeomorphism ϕ : Σa −→ Σb together with the structure
of a constant F -diffeomorphism on (−a , a ) × ϕ : (−a , a ) × Σa −→ (−a , a ) × Σb .
We call these morphisms limit morphisms.
The composition of limit morphisms is induced from the composition of F -diffeomorphisms. From a limit morphism ϕ we can construct a regular morphism M (ϕ) for
every  > a by gluing [0, 34 ) × Σa and ( 41 , ] × Σb together along the diffeomorphism
( 14 , 34 ) × ϕ. The constant F -diffeomorphism ϕ can be used to equip M (ϕ) with
a F -background gauge field via the descent property of stacks. We call M (ϕ) the
mapping cylinder of length  of ϕ. Note that M (ϕ) can be defined as a manifold for
all  > 0. Informally, we think of limit morphism ϕ as the  −→ 0 limit of M (ϕ).
Let ϕ be a limit morphism and (M, f, ϕ− , ϕ+ ) a regular morphism. The composition (M, f, ϕ− , ϕ+ ) ◦ ϕ (when defined) is the regular morphism (M, f, ϕ− ◦ [0, ) ×
ϕ, ϕ+ ). The composition ϕ ◦ (M, f, ϕ− , ϕ+ ) is the regular morphism (M, f, ϕ− , ϕ+ ◦
18

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

(−, 0] × ϕ−1 ).
The composition of regular morphisms (M, f, ϕ− , ϕ+ ) : (Σa , a , fΣa ) −→ (Σb , b , fΣb )
and (M 0 , f 0 , ϕ0− , ϕ0+ ) : (Σb , b , fΣb ) −→ (ΣC , c , fΣc ) is given by gluing the underlying
manifolds along collars (see Figure 2.1 for a sketch). To equip the composition with
a background field cover M tΣb M 0 with three open sets
U− = M \ Σb ,
U+ = M 0 \ Σb ,

(2.6)

U−+ = (−, ) × Σb .
The background gauge field on M tΣb M 0 is now defined via the descent property
of the stack F for the cover {U− , U−+ , U+ } from f |U− , f 0 |U+ and fΣb . The required
morphisms in F (U− ∩ U−+ ) and F (U−+ ∩ U+ ) are part of the structure of the F diffeomorphisms ϕ+ and ϕ− . The monidal structure on CobF
n is the disjoint union
of manifolds.
Remark 2.7. The composition of regular morphisms can also be described in terms
of mapping cylinders. It corresponds to removing the collars for the boundaries
along which the gluing takes place and then replacing them with mapping cylinders
0
Mb (ϕ−1
+ ) and Mb (ϕ− ), respectively. The composed morphism corresponds to gluing
the resulting manifolds along Σb .
Remark 2.8. The definition of CobF
n is far from perfect. There are two important
points one should improve to describe the actual structure of quantum field theories:
• The objects we use depend on the actual value of . It would be better to work
with germs of geometric structures.
• Our definition does not contain any information about the smooth structure of
the background fields.
Both problems are solved in the approach by Stolz and Teichner [49] using germs and
categories fibred over manifolds. We do not work with their approach, because it is
harder to generalize to the bicategorical setting in Section 2.1.2.
Based on the symmetric monoidal category CobF
n describing the geometry of ndimensional manifolds, we can give a definition of n-dimensional functorial quantum
field theories.
Definition 2.9. An n-dimensional functorial quantum field theory is a symmetric
monoidal functor
Z : CobF
n −→ HilbC ,

(2.10)

where HilbC is the symmetric monoidal category of complex Hilbert spaces and bounded
linear operators.
19

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

The simplest example of a functorial quantum field theory is the trivial theory
1 : CobF
n −→ HilbC

(2.11)

sending every object to the one-dimensional Hilbert space C and every morphism to
the identity map.
Definition 2.9 is an effective way to (partially) encode the structure generally
expected to be part of a quantum field theory. For example, the time evolution
operator “exp(− i Ht)” on the Hilbert space Z((Σ, , f )) for an object (Σ, , f ) ∈
CobF
n is the bounded linear operator assigned to the mapping cylinder Mt (idΣ ).
Note that in our formalism the time evolution operator is only defined for t > .
This is a consequence of the shortcomings mentioned in Remark 2.8. For a more
detailed discussion of the functorial approach to quantum field theory we refer to
[77].
Let Σ be an n − 1-dimensional manifold. We denote by SymF
n (Σ) the symmetry
F
subgroupoid of Cobn with objects having Σ as underlying manifold and only limit
morphisms as morphisms. Furthermore, we denote by SymF
n the subgroupoid of
F
Cobn containing only limit morphisms.
Example 2.12.
• Let F be the stack (sheaf ) of (Riemannian) metrics. Every
metric g on Σ defines an object (Σ, 1, dt2 + g) ∈ CobF
n , where we denote the
coordinate along (−1, 1) by t. A morphism (Σ, 1, dt2 + g) −→ (Σ0 , 1, dt2 + g 0 )
0
in SymF
n (Σ) is an isometry Σ −→ Σ .
• Let G be a Lie group and F the stack of principal G-bundles with connection.
A bundle on Σ defines again an object of SymF
n (Σ) via pullback along the projection (−1, 1) × Σ −→ Σ. The morphism in SymF
n (Σ) with trivial underlying
diffeomorphism corresponding to connection preserving gauge transformations.
A representation of a groupoid G is a functor G −→ HilbC (or VectC ). A representation is called unitary if all morphisms in its image are unitary operators. Every
functorial quantum field theory induces by restriction to SymF
n a representation of
its symmetry groupoid. However, in general there is no reason for this representation
to be unitary. To get unitary representations from functorial field theories one needs
to work with so called reflection positive field theories [18].
In physics, a symmetry is an automorphism of the state space which commutes
with the time evolution operator or equivalently the Hamiltonian of the theory. We
show that this is captured by the framework functorial field theories.
Proposition 2.13. Let Z : CobF
n −→ HilbC be a functorial quantum field theory and
ϕ : (Σ, , f ) −→ (Σ0 , , f 0 ) a limit morphism. The symmetry Z(ϕ) : Z(Σ, , f ) −→
Z(Σ0 , , f 0 ) commutes with the time evolution operator.
Proof. The mapping cylinder Mt (idΣ,f ) is ([0, t] × Σ, f ) ∈ CobF
n . We prove the
statement by showing that the morphisms ([0, t] × Σ0 , f 0 ) ◦ ϕ and ϕ ◦ ([0, t] × Σ, f )

20

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

agree as morphisms in CobF
n . For this consider the diagram
[0, t] × Σ0
id ×ϕ

[0, ) × Σ

id ×ϕ−1

(−, 0] × Σ0

(2.14)

·+t×ϕ−1

[0, t] × Σ
of F -manifolds which shows that both morphism lie in the same equivalence class.
F
Let Z1 : CobF
n −→ HilbC and Z2 : Cobn −→ HilbC be n-dimensional functorial
quantum field theories. We define the tensor product Z1 ⊗ Z2 locally, i.e. via

Z1 ⊗ Z2 (Σ, , f ) := Z1 (Σ, , f ) ⊗ Z2 (Σ, , f ) .

(2.15)

There is a simple class of functorial quantum field theories which is central for the
description of anomalies in qunatum field theories.
Definition 2.16. A functorial quantum field theory Z : CobF
n −→ HilbC is invertible
−1
if there exists a functorial quantum field theory Z : CobF
n −→ HilbC such that
−1 ∼
Z ⊗ Z = 1.
Recall that a Picard groupoid is a symmetric monoidal groupoid in which every
object and morphism has an inverse with respect to the tensor product. Every
invertible field theory factors through the maximal Picard subgroupoid of HilbC .

2.1.2

A cobordism bicategory

In this section we make the first step towards extending the definition of a functorial
quantum field to include manifolds of codimension 2 by defining a bicategorical
version of CobF
n . This requires the use of manifolds with corners. We introduce
the necessary mathematical definitions now.
Manifolds with corners
It is possible to define manifolds with corners of arbitrary codimension. We restrict
ourself to codimension 2 for notational convenience. Roughly speaking, a manifold
of dimension n is a topological space which locally looks like open subsets of Rn . The
idea behind manifolds with corners of codimension 2 is to replace Rn by Rn−2 × R2≥0 ;
we denote by prR2≥0 : Rn−2 × R2≥0 −→ R2≥0 the obvious projection. A map between
subsets of Rn−2 × R2≥0 is smooth if there exists a smooth extension to open subsets
of Rn . A chart for a subset U of a topological space X is then a homeomorphism
21

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

Figure 2.2: A manifold with corners such that the red submanifold of the boundary
does not admit a collar.

ϕ : U −→ V ⊂ Rn−2 × R2≥0 . Two charts ϕ1 : U1 −→ V1 and ϕ2 : U2 −→ V2 are
compatible if ϕ2 ◦ ϕ−1
1 : ϕ1 (U1 ∩ U2 ) −→ ϕ2 (U1 ∩ U2 ) is a diffeomorphism. As for
manifolds, a collection of charts covering X is called an atlas. An atlas is maximal
if it contains all compatible charts.
Definition 2.17. A manifold with corners of codimension 2 is a second countable
Hausdorff space M together with a maximal atlas.
Remark 2.18. Closed manifolds and manifolds with boundary are, in particular,
manifolds with corners.
We define the tangent space Tx M at a point x ∈ M as the space of derivatives on
the real-valued functions C ∞ (M ) at x. We define embeddings in the same way as for
manifolds without corners, i.e. as smooth injective maps which are injective on all
tangent spaces. We are now able to introduce an essential concept used throughout
this thesis.
Definition 2.19. A collar for a submanifold Y ⊂ ∂M is a diffeomorphism ϕ : [0, )×
Y −→ UY for some fixed  > 0 and a neighbourhood UY of Y .
Remark 2.20. In general collars do not exist as can be seen from the simple example
in Figure 2.2.
Given x ∈ M we define the index of x index(x) ∈ {0, 1, 2} to be the number
of coordinates of prR2≥0 ◦ ϕ (x) equal to 0 for a (and hence every) chart ϕ of a
neighbourhood of x. The corners of M are the collection of all points of index 2.
A connected face of M is the closure of a maximal connected subset of points of
index 1.
Definition 2.21. A manifold with corners is a manifold with faces if each x ∈ M
belongs to exactly index(x) connected faces.
22

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

In this case we define a face of M to be a disjoint union of connected faces, which
is a manifold with boundary. A boundary defining function for a face Hi is a function
ρi ∈ C ∞ (M ) such that ρi (x) ≥ 0 and ρi (x) = 0 if and only if x ∈ Hi .
Definition 2.22. A h2i-manifold is a manifold M with faces together with two faces
∂0 M and ∂1 M such that ∂M = ∂0 M ∪ ∂1 M and ∂0 M ∩ ∂1 M are the corners of M .
Denote by ∆1 the category corresponding to the ordered set {0, 1}. Concretely
∆1 has two objects 0 and 1 and one non identity morphism 0 −→ 1. A h2i-manifold
M then defines a diagram M : ∆21 −→ Manc of shape ∆21 in the category Manc of
manifolds with corners and smooth embeddings:
M
∂0 M

∂1 M

(2.23)

∂0 M ∩ ∂1 M
Moreover, h2i-manifolds always admit a compatible set of collars:
Proposition 2.24. Let M be an n-dimensional h2i-manifold and 0 , 1 positive real
numbers. There are collars, [0, 0 ) × (∂0 M ∩ ∂1 M ) ,→ ∂0 M , [0, 1 ) × (∂0 M ∩ ∂1 M ) ,→
∂1 M , [0, 1 ) × ∂0 M ,→ M and [0, 0 ) × ∂1 M ,→ M such that the following diagram
commutes
M
[0, 1 ) × ∂0 M

[0, 0 ) × ∂1 M

(2.25)

[0, 0 ) × [0, 1 ) × (∂0 M ∩ ∂1 M )
For a proof see for example [78, Lemma 2.1.6].
Invariant background fields
Informally, we want to think of objects in the bicategory CobF
n,n−1,n−2 as (n − 2)dimensional manifolds equipped with F -background fields. However, it might not
be possible to evaluate the stack F on manifolds of lower dimensions directly. For
this reason our objects will be (n − 2)-dimensional manifolds S together with an
F -background field on (−1 , 1 ) × (−2 , 2 ) × S. We still want to keep the intuition
that these fields only depend on the manifold S and hence require the background
fields to be “constant” in the (−1 , 1 ) × (−2 , 2 ) direction. To formulate what we
mean by constant we make the following definition:
23

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

Definition 2.26. Let F be a stack, M a manifold, and S (M ) a groupoid which
consists of a collection of open subsets of M including M and a collection of diffeomorphisms as morphisms.
(a) An invariant structure with respect to S (M ) for an element f ∈ F (M ) is a
natural 2-transformation
F

S (M )op

f

Grpd

(2.27)

1

from the constant 2-functor sending every object to the groupoid 1 with one
object and one morphism, such that the natural transformation is induced on
objects by f (see the following remark for an explaination). Here we regard
S (M ) as a 2-category with trivial 2-morphisms.1 We call an element f ∈
F (M ) together with the choice of an invariant structure an invariant element.
(b) A morphism Θ : f −→ f 0 between invariant elements f, f 0 ∈ F (M ) is invariant
under S (M ) if it induces a modification (see Definition A.14) between the
natural 2-transformations corresponding to f and f 0 .
Remark 2.28. Let us spell out in detail what we mean by saying that f ∈ F (M )
induces a natural 2-transformation on objects. A map fU: 1 −→ F (U ) is an element of F (U ). We set fU = f|U for all U ∈ Obj S (M ) . To equip this with the
structure of a natural 2-transformation we have to fix natural transformations (see
Definition A.9)
1

HomS (M )op (U1 , U2 )
F(·)

fU1 U2


HomGrpd F (U1 ), F (U2 )

HomGrpd (1, 1)
fU2 ∗

∗
fU
1

(2.29)


HomGrpd 1, F (U2 )

They can be described by a collection of morphisms fU1 U2 (t) : t∗ fU1 −→ fU2 for every
morphism t : U2 −→ U1 of S (M ) which have to satisfy the coherence conditions
(A.11) and (A.12):
fU2 U3 (t2 ) ◦ t∗2 fU1 U2 (t1 ) = fU1 U3 (t1 ◦ t2 ) ◦ ΦF (U3 )F (U2 )F (U1 ) (t1 × t2 ) ,

(2.30)

fU U (idU ) ◦ ΦF (U ) (id? ) = id fU

(2.31)

for morphisms t2 : U3 −→ U2 and t1 : U2 −→ U1 . For a sheaf considered as a stack,
the maps fU1 U2 (t) must be identity maps and we reproduce, for example, the definition
of an invariant function.
This is the same as a higher fixed point for the groupoid action corresponding to F , as discussed
for example in [79].
1

24

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

Example 2.32. Let F = BunG be the stack of principal G-bundles, and let M be a
manifold equipped with an action ρ : Γ −→ Diff(M ) of a group Γ by diffeomorphisms
of M . We can encode the action into a groupoid S (M ) as in Definition 2.26 with
one object M and morphisms {ρ(γ) | γ ∈ Γ}. A G-bundle P which is invariant
under S (M ) comes with gauge transformations Θγ : ρ(γ)∗ P −→ P satisfying (2.30)
and (2.31). This is just a Γ-equivariant G-bundle. An invariant morphism between
two Γ-equivariant G-bundles is then a Γ-equivariant gauge transformation.
Definition 2.33. Let k < n be a positive number and Σ an n − k-dimensional
manifold (with boundary). For every collection of (not necessarily open) intervals
I1 , . . . , Ik ⊂ R, we say that an element f ∈ F (I1 × · · · × Ik × Σ) is constant along
I1 × · · · × Ik if it is invariant under translations in the direction along I1 × · · · × Ik ,
i.e. invariant with respect to the groupoid with open subsets of I1 × · · · × Ik × Σ as
objects and translations along I as morphisms.
Example 2.34. For example metrics of the form dt21 +. . . dt2k +gΣ on I1 ×· · ·×Ik ×Σ
are constant along I1 × · · · × Ik . Furthermore, every pullback of a structure defined
on Σ to I1 × · · · × Ik × Σ along the projection will be constant in a canonical way.
Now we have all the mathematical prerequisites at our disposal to define
The bicategory CobF
n,n−1,n−2
Inspired by [55] and the sketch of [37, Appendix A], we introduce a bicategory of
manifolds equipped with geometric fields. For the definition of a Dirac operator, a
metric on the underlying manifold is crucial, whence we cannot assume that the field
content is topological. This leads to technical problems in defining 2-morphisms. We
make the assumption that the field content is constant near gluing boundaries and
use a specific choice of collars to get around these problems.
We define the bicategory CobF
n,n−1,n−2 with objects given by quadruples

S, f n−2 , 1 , 2
(2.35)
consisting of a closed (n − 2)-dimensional manifold S with l connected components
S1 , . . . , Sl , l-tuples 1 , 2 ∈ Rl>0 and an element f n−2 ∈ F (−1 , 1 ) × (−2 , 2 ) × S
which is constant along (−1 , 1 ) × (−2 , 2 ). Here we introduced the notation
(−1 , 1 ) × (−2 , 2 ) × S =

l
G

(−1,i , 1,i ) × (−2,i , 2,i ) × Si ,

(2.36)

i=1

which we will continue to use throughout this section.
There are two different kinds of 1-morphisms in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 :
(1a) Regular 1-morphisms


Σ : S− , f−n−2 , −1 , −2 −→ S+ , f+n−2 , +1 , +2
25

(2.37)

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

consist of 7-tuples

n−1 n−1
n−1
n−1
Σ, ϕn−1
, Θ−
, Θ+
, ,
− , ϕ+ , f

(2.38)

where Σ is a (n − 1)-dimensional manifold with boundary and k connected
components together with a decomposition of a collar of its boundary into N−n−1
n−1
n−1
and N+n−1 , ϕn−1
and ϕ+
:(−+2 , 0] × S+ −→ N+n−1
− : [0, −1 ) × S− −→ N−
are diffeomorphisms,  ∈ Rk>0 , f n−1 ∈ F (−, ) × Σ is constant along (−, )
n−1
n−1
to
and2 Θ±
: f±n−2 −→ ϕ∗± f n−1 are constant morphisms. Here we use Θ±
implicitly define the structure of a constant object on N±n−1 .
(1b) Limit 1-morphisms consist of diffeomorphisms φ : S −→ S 0 together with the
structure of a constant F -diffeomorphism on (−1 , 1 ) × (−2 , 2 ) × φ.3
For the composition of regular 1-morphisms Σ1 : S −→ S 0 and Σ2 : S 0 −→ S 00 we
glue the underlying manifolds using their collars. The manifold Σ2 ◦ Σ1 comes with a
natural open cover (compare also Equation (2.6)) U1 = Σ1 \S 0 , U12 = (−1+ , 2− )×S 0
and U2 = Σ2 \ S 0 . We equip the resulting manifold with a F -background field
using covers (−, ) × U1 , (−, ) × U2 and (−, ) × U12 and the descent property
of the stack F . Note that the isomorphisms required for the descent are part of
the regular 1-morphisms. Composition of limit 1-morphisms is given by composition
of F -diffeomorphisms. The composition of a limit 1-morphism with a regular 1n−1
morphism is given by changing the identification of the collars and Θ±
using the
limit 1-morphism.
There are also two different kinds of 2-morphisms in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 :
(2a) Regular 2-morphisms (see Figure 2.3)

n−1 n−1
n−1
n−1
M : Σ1 , ϕn−1
, Θ1−
, Θ1+
, 1
1− , ϕ1+ , f1

n−1
n−1
n−1
n−1
=⇒ Σ2 , ϕ2−
, ϕn−1
, Θ2−
, Θ2+
, 2 ,
2+ , f2


with Σi : S− , f−n−2 , −1 , −2 −→ S+ , f+n−2 , +1 , +2 regular 1-morphisms for
i = 1, 2, consist of equivalence classes of 6-tuples

n
n
M, f n , ϕn− , ϕn+ , Θ−
, Θ+
,
(2.39)
where M is an n-dimensional h2i-manifold with corners equipped with collars
N−n and N+n of part of the 0-boundary such that the closure of N±d contains
the 1-boundary, f n is an element of F (M ), ϕn− : [0, −1 ) × Σ1 −→ N−n and
n
ϕn+ : (−+2 , 0] × Σ2 −→ N+d are diffeomorphisms, and Θ−
: f1n−1 −→ ϕn−∗ f n and
n−1
n
n∗ n
Θ+ : f2 −→ ϕ+ f are constant morphisms. All of these structures have to
2
3

For this statement to make sense we require that  is compatible with ±2 on the boundary.
For this to make sense we require that all l-tuples  are equal.

26

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

(−2 , 0] × Σ2

ϕn+

M

(−−2 , 0)×[0, −1 )×S−

(−+2 , 0)×[0, +1 )×S+

ϕn−

[0, 1 ) × Σ1

Figure 2.3: Illustration of a regular 2-morphism in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 .
be compatible, in the sense that the diagram
(−2 , 0) × Σ2
id ×ϕn−1
2−

(−−2 , 0) × [0, −1 ) × S−

id ×ϕn−1
2+

ϕd
+
ı−

M
ϕn
−

(·+−2 )×ϕn−1
1−

ı+

(−+2 , 0) × [0, +1 ) × S+
(·++2 )×ϕn−1
1+

(0, 1 ) × Σ1

(2.40)
commutes, where ı± are inclusions. We change the sign of the coordinates
corresponding to both intervals in the lower embedding. This induces a diagram
of functors in groupoids and we require that all morphisms Θ are compatible
with this diagram. Note that the collars of the 1-morphisms induce collars for
the 1-boundaries which agree by (2.40). Two such 6-tuples are equivalent if
they are F -diffeomorphic relative to half of the collars.
(2b) Limit 2-morphisms consist of pairs (φ, Θ), where φ : Σ1 −→ Σ2 is a diffeomorphism relative to the collars and Θ is the structure of a constant F 27

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

diffeomorphism on (−, ) × φ. There are no non-trivial 2-morphisms between
limit 1-morphisms.
We define horizontal and vertical composition of 2-morphisms as follows:
(Ha) Horizontal composition of regular 2-morphisms is given by gluing along 1boundaries.
(Hb) Horizontal composition of limit 2-morphisms is defined by “gluing together”
diffeomorphisms and the descent condition for morphisms in the stack F . This
uses the open cover defined in (2.6).
(Hc) Horizontal composition of a limit 2-morphism with a regular 2-morphism is
defined by the attachment of a mapping cylinder to the 1-boundary.
(Va) Vertical composition of limit 2-morphisms is given by composition of diffeomorphisms, pullback and composition of morphisms in the stack F .
(Vb) Vertical composition of regular 2-morphisms is a slightly more complicated.
Simple gluing of M and M 0 along a common 1-morphism does not return a
2-morphism, since the resulting 1-boundaries are “too long”. In the context of
topological field theories a solution to this problem [55] consists of picking once
and for all a diffeomorphism [0, 2] −→ [0, 1]. We are unable to use this trick
here, since the stacks we consider in this thesis may contain metrics. Instead,
we will use collars to circumvent this problem. Given two regular 2-morphisms
M1 : Σ1 =⇒ Σ2 and M2 : Σ2 =⇒ Σ3 , we define

(2.41)
M̃1 = M1 \ ϕn1+ (− 2 , 0] × Σ2 ,

M̃2 = M2 \ ϕn2− [0, 2 ) × Σ2 .

(2.42)

We define the vertical composition M2 ◦ M1 to be the manifold resulting from
gluing M̃1 and M̃2 along Σ2 . We have to equip
 this manifold with appropriate
collars: Write Ñ1n = N1n ∩ ϕn1+ [− 2 , 0] × Σ2 , where N1n is the incoming collar
of M1 . We set


(2.43)
C = ϕn2− ◦ ( · +  × id) ◦ (ϕn1+ )−1 Ñ1n .
We can glue C to the remainder of the collar of M1 to get a new collar; this
is only possible because we assumed that the corresponding elements of F are
constant along the collars. It is possible to define a new collar for Σ3 in the
same way.
(Vc) Vertical composition of a limit 2-morphism with a regular 2-morphism is defined
by changing the identification of collars as in Section 2.1.1.
This completes the definition of the geometric cobordism bicategory CobF
n,n−1,n−2 . We
F
will show that the disjoint union of manifolds turns Cobn,n−1,n−2 into a symmetric
monoidal bicategory.
We prove that CobF
n,n−1,n−2 is a symmetric monoidal bicategory using a method
developed by Schulman [80, 81] following a similar proof in the topological case by
Schommer-Pries [55, Section 3.1.4]. For this we recall
28

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

Definition 2.44 ([80]). A symmetric monoidal pseudo-double category D consists
of a symmetric monoidal category of “objects” D0 , a symmetric monoidal category
of “arrows” D1 , symmetric monoidal functors
id : D0 −→ D1 ,
S, T : D1 −→ D0 ,

(2.45)

: D1 ×D0 D1 −→ D1 ,
and symmetric monoidal natural transformations
α : (−

−)

(−

−),

−) =⇒ idD1 ,

λ : (id(−)
ρ : (−

− =⇒ −

(2.46)

id(−)) =⇒ idD1 ,

such that S and T are strict, S(id(A)) = T (id(A)) = A for all A ∈ D0 , S(M N ) =
S(N ) and T (M N ) = T (M ) for all N, M ∈ D1 , applying S and T to the natural
transformations in Equation (2.46) gives identities, α, λ, ρ satisfy the usual coherence
conditions for monoidal categories (Pentagon and Triangle relation) and id strictly
preserves the unit object of D0 .
We interpret the data of a symmetric monoidal pseudo-double category as follows:
• Its objects are the elements of D0 .
• The morphisms f : A −→ B in D0 are its vertical 1-morphisms.
• An object g of D1 is a horizontal 1-morphisms g : S(g) −→ T (g).
• A morphisms F : g −→ g 0 ∈ D1 is a 2-morphisms filling the square
g

S(g)

F

S(F )

S(g 0 )

g0

T (g)
T (F )

(2.47)

T (g 0 )

2-morphism admit a strict vertical composition and a coherent horizontal composition. Let D be a symmetric monoidal pseudo-double category. Restricting to
2-morphisms F such that S and T applied to it are identities defines a bicategory
H(D) [80]. The advantage of using symmetric monoidal pseudo-double categories
is that there is simple criterion for the bicategory H(D) to be symmetric monoidal.
Before we can state this result we need to recall one more definition from [80]:
Definition 2.48. Let D be a symmetric monoidal pseudo-double category. Furthermore, let f : A −→ B be a vertical 1-morphism. A companion of f is a horizontal
29

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

1-morphism fb: A −→ B together with 2-morphisms
fb

A

B

FB

f

B

id(B)

A
and

id

id

B

A

id(A)

A

FA

f

(2.49)

B

fb

such that
A

id(A)

FA

id

A

fb

FB

f

B

id(B)

A
A

f

B = f

A

id(f )

B

id

id(A)

id(B)

(2.50)

f

B

B

and
A
id

A

id(A)

FA
fb

A
f

B

fb

B

FB
id(B)

id

B

A
= id
A

fb

idfb
fb

B
id

(2.51)

B

A conjoint of f is a companion of f in the symmetric monoidal pseudo-double category constructed from D by reversing the direction of the horizontal 1-morphisms but
not of the vertical 1-morphisms.
Theorem 2.52 (Theorem 5.1 of [80]). Let D be a symmetric monoidal pseudo-double
category such that every vertical 1-morphism admits a companion and a conjoint.
Then H(D) is a symmetric monoidal bicategory.
Corollary 2.53. CobF
n,n−1,n−2 is a symmetric monoidal bicategory.
Proof. Note that CobF
n,n−1,n−2 can be constructed from the following symmetric
monoidal pseudo-double category:
• The category D0 consists of the objects of CobF
n,n−1,n−2 and limit 1-morphisms
between them.
• The horizontal 1-morphisms (objects of D1 ) are all 1-morphisms in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 .
F
• 2-morphism are an extension of the 2-morphisms in Cobn,n−1,n−2 allowing the
morphisms to be non constant at the corners. More concretely, there are the
following two types of 2-morphisms:
30

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

(2a0 ) Regular 2-morphisms are as above with the Condition 2.40 replaced with
the weaker condition that the failure of the Diagram 2.40 to commute is
given by constant F -diffeomorphisms.
0
(2b ) Limit 2-morphisms are F -diffeomorphism which do not need to be relative
to the boundaries. However, they still need to be constant on the collars.
The monoidal structure is induced by the disjoint union of manifolds. We need to
show that every vertical morphism f in D admits companions and conjoints. These
are just f and f −1 considered as horizontal 1-morphisms.
Remark 2.54. The bicategory CobF
n,n−1,n−2 has the same shortcomings as its cateF
gorical analogue Cobn . Concretely, the explicit dependence on the collar size  and
the fact that we ignore the smooth structure of the background fields are unsatisfactory. The smoothness problem could be solved by working with bicategories fibred
over the category of smooth manifolds. However, we are not aware of an approach
which solves the -dependence in general. The problem is that as soon as metrics
are involved the 1-boundary has a length and it seems hard to glue 1-boundaries of
different length together. In the context of 2-dimensional extended conformal field
theories a similar problem can be solved by allowing specific kinds of singular manifolds [82]. A possible general solution is to work with double bicategories instead of
bicategories [83]. All the results in this thesis should carry over to other definitions
of the cobordism bicategory.

2.1.3

The definition

There is still one ingredient missing for the definition of extended functorial field
theories: the target bicategory. This should be an appropriate categorification of the
category of Hilbert spaces. To our knowledge there is no universally accepted target.
In this thesis we will restrict ourself to a simple target bicategory 2VectC which is
standard in the context of extended topological field theories, see the appendix of
[84] for a discussion of possible targets for topological field theories. The elements of
2VectC are called Kapranov-Voevodsky 2-vector spaces and can be understood as a
categorification of finite dimensional vector spaces.
Definition 2.55. A Kapranov-Voevodsky 2-vector space [47] is a C-linear semisimple additive category V with finitely many isomorphism classes of simple objects;
in particular, a 2-vector space is also an abelian category. There is a 2-category
2VectC of 2-vector spaces, C-linear functors and natural transformations. Given two
2-vector spaces V1 and V2 we can define their tensor product V1  V2 [85, Definition 1.15] to be the category with objects given by finite formal sums
n
M

V1i  V2i ,

i=1

31

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

with V1i ∈ Obj(V1 ) and V2i ∈ Obj(V2 ). The space of morphisms is given by
HomV1 V2

L
n
i=1

V1i  V2i ,

m
L
j=1

V1j0  V2j0



=

n M
m
M
i=1

HomV1 (V1i , V1j0 ) ⊗C HomV2 (V2i , V2j0 ) .

j=1

This tensor product coincides with the Deligne product of abelian categories. It furthermore satisfies the universal property with respect to bilinear functors that one
would expect from a tensor product. We can also take tensor products of C-linear
functors and of natural transformations. Then the 2-category 2VectC with  is a
symmetric monoidal bicategory with monoidal unit 1 given by the category of finitedimensional vector spaces VectC .
Remark 2.56. It would be more appropriate to work with “2-Hilbert space” as defined for example in [86]. We choose here to work with 2VectC since it reduces some
of the technical complexity while still capturing all essential features.
Let V be a 2-vector space. The natural functor
HomV (·, ·) : V opp × V −→ VectC

(2.57)

is part of a two variable adjunction
HomVectC (S, HomV (V1 , V2 )) ∼
= HomV (S ∗ V1 , V2 ) ∼
= HomV (V1 , V2S )

(2.58)

for all V1 , V2 ∈ V and S ∈ VectC . The linear functor
∗ : VectC  V −→ V

(2.59)

equips V with the structure of a VectC -module category. This explains in which
sense KV 2-vector spaces are a categorification of vector spaces: The ground field C
is replaced with the category VectC and vector spaces (C-modules) are replaced by
a particularly nice class of VectC -module categories.
The following remark provides a concrete description for the objects, 1-morphism
and 2-morphisms in 2VectC .
Remark 2.60. Being semi-simple with a finite number of simple objects means that
every 2-vector space V is equivalent as a linear category to VectC k for a natural
number k. Linear functors preserve direct sums. This allows us to describe a linear
functor VectC k −→ VectC l up to equivalence by a matrix (Vij )i=1,...k,j=1,...,l of vector
spaces. Composition of linear functors is given by matrix multiplication replacing the
multiplication of numbers with the tensor product ⊗ of vector space.
A natural transformation (Vij ) =⇒ (Vij0 ) can be described by a matrix of linear
maps fij : Vij −→ Vij0 . Vertical composition is the component-wise composition of
linear maps and horizontal composition is given by matrix multiplication combined
with the tensor product of linear maps.

32

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

All examples of extended functorial field theories considered in this thesis can
be formulated using the 2-category 2VectC . However, it is too restrictive for a general quantum field theory. The 2-category 2VectC should embed into any reasonable
target bicategory and hence it seems reasonable to work with the 2-category 2VectC
whenever possible. Even though 2VectC is “finite dimensional” in nature, it is still
able to capture crucial properties about the infinite dimensional state space of quantum field theories with anomalies, see [37] for more details.
Now we can state the central definition for this thesis.
Definition 2.61. An n-dimensional extended functorial quantum field theory with
background fields F (or extended quantum field theory for short) is a symmetric
monoidal 2-functor
Z : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC
from a geometric cobordism bicategory to the 2-category of 2-vector spaces.
The simplest example is again the trivial theory 1 : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC which
F
assigns to every object S ∈ Cobn,n−1,n−2 the category of finite dimensional vector
spaces, to every 1-morphism in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 the identity functor VectC −→ VectC
and to every 2-morphism the identity natural transformation.
The following remark explains how Definition 2.61 extends Definition 2.9.
Remark 2.62. The endomorphism category of the monoidal unit ∅ ∈ CobF
n,n−1,n−2
has as objects pairs (Σ, f n−1 , ) where Σ is a closed (n − 1)-dimensional manifold and
f n−1 is an element of F ((−, ) × Σ). A morphism is a cobordism equipped with a
compatible F -background field. This category does not agree with CobF
n directly since
(∅)
involves
deleting
half
of
the
collar.
However,
the composition in EndCobF
n,n−1,n−2
(∅) which sends an object (Σ, f n−1 , ) to
there is a functor CobF
n −→ EndCobF
n,n−1,n−2
the object (Σ, f n−1 , 2) and sends a regular morphism to the cobordism with a cylinder
of length  added to the ingoing and outgoing boundary.
By restriction and pullback along this functor every extended functorial field theF
∼
ory Z : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC induces a functor Cobn −→ End2VectC (VectC ) =
VectC , i.e. an ordinary quantum field theory with values in the category of finite
dimensional vector spaces.

We define the tensor product Z1  Z2 of two extended quantum field theories
Z1 , Z2 : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC pointwise, i.e. by (Z1  Z2 )[S] = Z1 (S)  Z2 (S) for
all objects S ∈ CobF
n,n−1,n−2 . We generalize Definition 2.16 to the extended case:
Definition 2.63. Let Z : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC be an extended functorial quantum
field theory. The theory Z is invertible if there exists a functorial quantum field
−1 ∼
theory Z −1 : CobF
= 1.
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC such that Z  Z
For a symmetric monoidal bicategory (B, ⊗B ) we call the maximal 2-subgroupoid
of B containing only elements, 1-morphisms and 2-morphisms which are (weakly)
33

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

invertible with respect to the tensor product the maximal Picard 2-subgroupoid of B.
Every invertible extended quantum field theory factors through the maximal Picard
2-subgroupoid of 2VectC , which is equivalent to a bicategory BC× with one object,
one 1-morphism and elements of C× as 2-morphisms.
A 2-representation of a groupoid G is a 2-functor G −→ 2VectC . Let SymF
n,n−1,n−2
and
limit
1-morphisms.
Note
be the groupoid consisting of all objects of CobF
n,n−1,n−2
that this is actually a groupoid, since limit morphisms compose strictly. Every
extended functorial quantum field theory induces a 2-representation of SymF
n,n−1,n−2 .
We will provide examples of extended field theories in Chapter 3 and 4, but for the
moment focus on the abstract description of anomalies in this framework.

2.2

Description of anomalies

We will now give a general description of anomalies in the framework of functorial
quantum field theory. The point of view we take in this thesis is that anomalies in
n−1 dimensions can be described by invertible extended field theories in n dimensions
[36, 37, 56]. This is naturally formulated in the language of symmetric monoidal
bicategories (or (∞, n)-categories, see [56]).

2.2.1

Relative field theories

Let B be a bicategory. We denote by tr B, the truncation of B, the bicategory with
the same objects and 1-morphisms, but only invertible 2-morphisms. Let F : B −→
B 0 be a 2-functor. We denote by tr F : tr B −→ B 0 its restriction to tr B. Note that
tr F factors through tr B 0 . However, it will be important that we consider tr F as a
functor to B 0 . The truncation operation is essential for the following definition [48]:
Definition 2.64. Let A1 , A2 : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC be two extended quantum field
theories. A functorial quantum field theory relative to A1 and A2 is a symmetric
monoidal natural transformation
Z : tr A1 =⇒ tr A2 .

(2.65)

Remark 2.66. This definition depends on what we mean by a ‘symmetric monoidal
natural transformation’. We use Definition A.27. In particular, we do not require
the natural transformations in the definition to be invertible and hence its direction is
important. The kind of transformations we consider are sometimes called lax in the
literature. We refer to [50] for a discussion of the different definitions in the more
general framework of (∞, n)-categories. Our choice is justified by Corollary 2.87
below, see also [50, Theorem 1.5].
The picture one should have in mind is that the theory Z lives on an interface
or codimension 1 defect between the theories A1 and A2 . A field theory living on
an interface between a theory A and the trivial theory is the same thing as a theory
34

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

living on the boundary of A. Anomalies can be described by a special type of relative
field theories.
Definition 2.67. An anomalous quantum field theory with anomaly described by
an invertible extended quantum field theory A : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC is a natural
symmetric monoidal 2-transformation
Z : 1 =⇒ trA .

(2.68)

We call A the anomaly quantum field theory describing the anomaly of Z.
In practice, anomaly field theories are of topological nature. For the description
of some anomalies the invertibility condition has to be relaxed, e.g. in the context
of 2-dimensional conformal field theories and 6-dimensional super conformal field
theories [37, 43]. These generalisations will not be discussed in this thesis.
Before we unpack the definition, we will look at the corresponding categorical
definition. We define the truncation tr C of a category C to be its maximal subgroupoid.
Definition 2.69. Let A : CobF
n −→ VectC be an n-dimensional invertible functorial
quantum field theory. An anomalous partition function with anomaly A is a natural
symmetric monoidal transformation
Z : 1 =⇒ tr A .

(2.70)

Unpacking this definition, we get for every object Σ ∈ CobF
n a linear map
Z(Σ) : C = 1(Σ) −→ A(Σ), such that the diagram
Z(Σ)

C

A(φ)

id

C

A(Σ)

Z(φ(Σ))

(2.71)


A φ(Σ)

commutes for all limit morphisms φ. Since A is an invertible field theory, A(Σ) is a
one-dimensional vector space and, as such, isomorphic to C, though not necessarily
in a canonical way. This translates into an ambiguity in the definition of the partition
function as a complex number, which is the simplest manifestation of an anomaly.
We now unpack Definition 2.67 using the conventions and notations outlined in
Appendix A. For every object S ∈ CobF
n,n−1,n−2 we get a C-linear functor
Z(S) : VectC = 1(S) −→ A(S) ,

(2.72)

which can be (non-canonically) identified with a complex vector space in VectC . For

35

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

S− , S+ ∈ CobF
n,n−1,n−2 we get a natural transformation
Hom tr CobF
S− , S+
n,n−1,n−2

1



Hom2VectC (VectC , VectC )

Z

A


Hom2VectC A(S− ), A(S+ )

(2.73)

Z(S+ )∗

Z(S− )∗

Hom2VectC VectC , A(S+ )



which consists of a natural linear transformation
Z(Σ) : A(Σ) ◦ Z(S− ) =⇒ A(S+ )
for every 1-morphism Σ : S− −→ S+ . The definition further includes a modification
ΠZ consisting of natural isomorphisms
ΠZ (S− , S+ ) : χA ◦ Z(S− )  Z(S+ ) =⇒ Z(S− t S+ ) ◦ λ tr CobF
n,n−1,n−2
and a natural isomorphism
MZ−1 : A(∅) =⇒ ιA .
All of these structures have to satisfy appropriate compatibility conditions, which
we summarize in
Proposition 2.74. For every anomalous quantum field theory Z with anomaly A,
there are identities
Z(Σ2 ) ◦ Z(Σ1 ) = Z(Σ2 ◦ Σ1 ) ◦ ΦA (A(Σ2 ) ◦ A(Σ1 )) ,
Z( idS ) ◦ ΦA (A(idS )) = idZ(S) ,

(2.75)
(2.76)

Z(Σ01 ) = Z(Σ02 ) ◦ (A(f ) • idZ(S−0 ) ) ,

(2.77)

for any 2-isomorphism f : Σ01 =⇒ Σ02 , together with the following commutative diagrams wherein we suppress obvious structure 2-morphisms and identity 2-morphisms:
A(Σ1 t Σ2 ) • χA • A(S1− )  A(S2− )

ΠZ (S1− ,S2− )

Z(Σ1 tΣ2 )

χA • Z(S1+ )  Z(S2+ )

A(Σ1 t Σ2 ) • Z(S1− t S2− )
Z(Σ1 )Z(Σ2 )

ΠZ (S1+ ,S2+ )

36

Z(S1+ t S2+ )

(2.78)

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

Z(α

A(α tr CobF

n,n−1,n−2

)•Z((S1 t S2 ) t S3 )

tr CobF
n,n−1,n−2

)

Z((S1 t S2 ) t S3 )
ΠZ (S1 ,S2 tS3 )

ΠZ (S1 tS2 ,S3 )

A(α tr CobF

n,n−1,n−2

)•χA •(A(S1 t S2 )  A(S3 ))

χA •(Z(S1 )  Z(S2 t S3 ))
ΠZ (S2 ,S3 )

ΠZ (S1 ,S2 )

A(α tr CobF

n,n−1,n−2

)•χA •((χA •Z(S1 )  Z(S2 ))  Z(S3 ))

ΩA

χA •(Z(S1 )  (χA •Z(S2 )  Z(S3 )))

Z(λCobF

)

n,n−1,n−2



A λ tr CobF
• Z(∅ t S)
n,n−1,n−2

Z S


(2.80)

−1
ΓA

ΠZ (∅,S)



A λ tr CobF
•
χ
•
Z(∅)

Z
S
A
n,n−1,n−2
Z St∅

(2.79)



Z(ρCobF

−1
MZ
id



)

n,n−1,n−2



A ρCobF
•Z S
n,n−1,n−2

ΠZ (S,∅)


χA • Z S  Z(∅)

ιA  Z S

(2.81)

∆A

−1
id MZ


Z S  ιA

and
A(β tr CobF

n,n−1,n−2

) • χA • Z(S1 )  Z(S2 )

ΠZ (S1 ,S2 )

n,n−1,n−2

) • Z(S1 t S2 )

Z(β tr CobF

−1
ΥA

χA • Z(S2 )  Z(S1 )

A(β tr CobF

n,n−1,n−2

ΠZ (S2 ,S1 )

Z(S2 t S1 )

(2.82)
Proof. Writing out the coherence diagrams (A.11) and (A.12) for Z implies (2.75)
and (2.76). The identity (2.77) is the naturality condition for the natural symmetric
monoidal 2-transformation Z. The diagram (2.78) follows from the diagram (A.15)
for the modification ΠZ . The diagrams (2.79)–(2.82) follow from writing out the
coherence conditions (A.30)–(A.33) for Z.
Remark 2.83. These conditions should be understood as a projective (or twisted)
version of the definition of a symmetric monoidal functor. For this reason we have
drawn the diagrams (2.79)–(2.82) in close analogy to the diagrams appearing in the
definition of a braided monoidal functor.
Remark 2.84. This remark provides a more concrete description of the data and axioms of an anomalous field theory using Remark 2.60. The functor Z(S) : VectC −→
A(S) can be described by an object Z(S)[C] ∈ A(S) which by a slight abuse of notation
we denote again by Z(S). The natural transformation Z(Σ) : A(Σ)◦Z(S1 ) =⇒ Z(S2 )
37

)

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

can be described by a morphism Z(Σ) : A(Σ)[Z(S1 )] −→ Z(S2 ) in A(S2 ). Requiring Z to be a natural 2-transformation explicitly reduces to the following: Let S,
S1 , S2 and S3 be objects of CobF
n,n−1,n−2 , and Σa : S1 −→ S2 and Σb : S2 −→ S3 be
F
1-morphisms in Cobn,n−1,n−2 . Then the diagrams
A(Σb ) ◦ A(Σa )[Z(S1 )]

A(Σb ◦ Σa )[Z(S1 )]

A(Σb )[Z(Σa )]

Z(Σb ◦Σa )

A(Σb )[Z(S2 )]

Z(Σb )

(2.85)

Z(S3 )

and
Z(S)

A(idS )[Z(S)]
(2.86)
Z(idS )

id

Z(S)
commute, where the unlabelled morphisms are part of the structure of the extended
field theory A. The modification MZ−1 can be described explicitly by specifying natural
morphisms
M −1 : Z(∅) −→ ιE (C)
in A(∅). The modification ΠZ is described by natural morphisms

ΠZ S1 , S2 : χA [Z(S1 )  Z(S2 )] −→ Z(S1 t S2 )
in A(S1 t S2 ). We do not spell out the condition corresponding to the monoidal
structure explicitly.
We have the following important corollary of Proposition 2.74 justifying Definition 2.67.
Corollary 2.87. An anomalous quantum field theory with trivial anomaly A : 1 =⇒
1 is an n − 1-dimensional quantum field theory.
Proof. We can canonically identify the functor Z(S) : VectC −→ VectC with the
vector space Z(S)(C) and the natural transformation Z(Σ) : idVectC ◦Z(S− ) ⇒ Z(S+ )
with a linear map Z(Σ) : Z(S− )(C) −→ Z(S+ )(C). The compatibility conditions
summarised by Proposition 2.74 then imply that the vector spaces and linear maps
defined in this way form a quantum field theory.
Remark 2.88. Let A : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC be an invertible extended field theF
ory and A : Cobn −→ VectC the non-extended field theory induced by restricting
A to the endomorphisms of the monoidal unit in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 as explained in Remark 2.62. Restricting Definition 2.67 to the endomorphisms of ∅ induces a natural
38

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

transformation tr A =⇒ 1 as can be seen from Remark 2.84. The direction for
this transformation does not agree with the one in Definition 2.69. Since in most
physically relevant examples all vector spaces are Hilbert spaces, this discrepancy can
be resolved by taking the adjoint. Here we stick to Definition 2.69, because it has
a natural geometric interpretation in terms of line bundles as explained in the next
section.

2.2.2

Projective anomaly actions

In the Lagrangian description of anomalies the partition function of an anomalous
field theory can be identified with a section of a line bundle over the space of background gauge fields. The anomaly is then realised as the non-triviality of this line
bundle [87, 88]. In the Hamiltonian description of anomalies [68, 88–90] the state
space of the theory cannot be defined in a gauge invariant way. The obstruction
to this is the non-triviality of a gerbe over the space of background fields. Gerbes
are higher analogues of line bundles. To recover these perspectives from the functorial approach we briefly review the theory of line bundles and 2-line bundles over
groupoids [75, 91].
A vector bundle over a groupoid G is a functor ρ : G −→ VectC . Although in
algebraic terms this is just a representation of G, the geometric viewpoint has proven
to be profitable, see e.g. [75] or [72].
A line bundle L : G −→ VectC is a vector bundle for which all fibres, i.e. images
ρ(x) for x ∈ G, are 1-dimensional vector spaces. Formulated differently, a line bundle
takes values in the maximal Picard subgroupoid of VectC . The simplest example is
the trivial line bundle 1 : G −→ VectC sending every object to C and every morphism to the identity map. A section of a line bundle L : G −→ VectC is a natural
transformation 1 =⇒ L.
The Picard groupoid corresponding to VectC is equivalent to the category C//C×
with one object C and C× as endomorphisms. Hence, we can factor every line bundle
up to a natural isomorphism as
G

L

VectC
(2.89)

L̃

C//C×
This shows that the groupoid of line bundles over G is equivalent to the groupoid
[G, C//C× ] of functors G −→ C//C× . Hence, line bundles over G are classified by
π0 [G, C//C× ] = [|BG|, K(C× , 1)] = H 1 (G; C× )

(2.90)

where
• |BG| is the geometric realisation of the nerve BG of G,
• K(C× , 1) is the aspherical Eilenberg-MacLane space with fundamental group
C×
39

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

• and H 1 (G; C× ) the first groupoid cohomology with coefficients in C× .
F
The restriction of every invertible field theory A : CobF
n −→ VectC to tr Cobn induces
F
a line bundle over the groupoid tr CobF
n . Note that tr Cobn is nothing else than the
F
groupoid Symn of symmetries. An anomalous partition function Z : 1 =⇒ tr A is
then just a section of this line bundle.
Remark 2.91. If the stack F is a smooth stack, i.e. the groupoid of background field
configurations is a (infinite dimensional) Lie groupoid, such as the stack of connections on a principal G-bundle, then it is natural to require the line bundle A|SymF
n
and the section corresponding to the anomalous partition function to be smooth in
an appropriate sense. We do not develop this idea in any detail in this thesis.
Categorifying the definition of a vector bundle over a groupoid we arrive at the
following notion, see [91]:
Definition 2.92. A 2-vector bundle over a groupoid G is a 2-functor
ρ : G −→ 2VectC ,

(2.93)

where we consider G as a 2-category with only trivial 2-morphisms.
This is again just a 2-representation of G. However, the geometric perspective
makes the relation to classical approaches to the description of anomalies more apparent.
A 2-line bundle over G is a 2-vector bundle which takes values in the full Picard
sub-2-groupoid of 2VectC . A section s of a 2-line bundle L : G −→ 2VectC is a natural
2-transformation s : 1 =⇒ L.
A 2-vector space is invertible with respect to the Degline tensor product if and
only if it is 1-dimensional, i.e. equivalent to the category of vector spaces. Every
linear functor between two 1-dimensional 2-vector spaces can be described up to
natural isomorphism by a vector space, see Remark 2.60. A functor is invertible
if and only if this vector space is 1-dimensional. This shows that the Picard 2subgroupoid of 2VectC is equivalent to VectC // id //C× . Hence, for every 2-line bundle
L : G −→ 2VectC there is a diagram
L

G

VectC
(2.94)

L̃

VectC // id //C×
commutative up to a 2-isomorphism.
Using the higher categorical analogue of (2.89), we arrive at a classification of
2-line bundles in terms of
π0 [G, VectC // id //C× ] = [|BG|, K(C× , 2)] = H 2 (G; C× ) .

(2.95)

Let us be a bit more explicit on how 2-functors G −→ VectC // id //C× = B2 C× are
related to 2-cocycles and their coboundaries.
40

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

Remark 2.96. (a) Let α : G −→ B2 C× be a 2-functor. Writing out Definition
A.4 we get for every pair (g, g 0 ) ∈ HomG (G1 , G2 ) × HomG (G2 , G3 ) a non-zero
complex number αg,g0 such that
αg3 ◦g2 ,g1 αg3 ,g2 = αg3 ,g2 ◦g1 αg2 ,g1 ,

(2.97)

for all composable morphisms g1 , g2 , g3 , and
αidt(g) ,g = αidt(g) ,idt(g) = αg,ids(g) .

(2.98)

Note that the 2-morphism α1 : α(id) =⇒ id is completely fixed by the coherence
−1
condition (A.8) and takes the value αid,id
.
(b) The data contained in a natural 2-transformation σ : α =⇒ α0 between two
2-cocycles is given by a collection σg ∈ C× for all morphisms g in G such that
σg2 ◦g1 αg0 2 ,g1 = αg2 ,g1 σg1 σg2

(2.99)

for all composable morphisms g1 , g2 . This is the coherence condition (A.11)
which also implies (A.12). We see that natural 2-transformations restrict to
the usual coboundaries on endomorphisms of an object.
(c) The data contained in a modification θ : σ V σ 0 between two natural 2transformations is an assignment of an element θG ∈ C× to every G ∈ Obj(G )
such that
θt(g) σg = σg0 θs(g) ,

(2.100)

which is the condition (A.15).
For an anomalous quantum field theory the symmetry group (groupoid) only
acts projectively. Projective representations of groupoids have the following concrete
definition (see e.g. [75, Section 2.3.1]).
Definition 2.101. A projective representation ρ of a groupoid G twisted by a 2cocycle α : G −→ B2 C× consists of the following data:
(a) A complex vector space VG for all G ∈ Obj(G).
(b) A linear map ρ(g) : Vs(g) −→ Vt(g) for each morphism g of G such that
ρ(g2 ) ◦ ρ(g1 ) = αg2 ,g1 ρ(g2 ◦ g1 )

(2.102)

for all composable morphisms g1 , g2 .
There is a reformulation of this definition adapted to the study of anomalous
functorial field theories.
Proposition 2.103. A projective groupoid representation with 2-cocycle α : G −→
B2 C× ⊂ 2VectC is the same as a natural 2-transformation 1 =⇒ α, where α is
considered as a 2-functor to 2VectC .4
4

This is the same as a higher fixed point for the representation α of G.

41

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

Proof. This follows immediately from spelling out Definition A.9.
Remark 2.104. We can use Proposition 2.103 to define intertwiners between projective representations as modifications between the corresponding 2-transformations.
To apply this general formalism to the anomalous field theories at hand, first note
that by restriction every extended invertible quantum field theory A : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→
F
2VectC induces a 2-line bundle over Symn,n−1,n−2 . An anomalous field theory Z : 1 =⇒
tr A induces a section of this 2-line bundle. We denote by Pic2 (2VectC ) the Picard 2-groupoid of the 2-category of 2-vector spaces; there is a canonical embedding
Pic2 (2VectC ) −→ 2VectC . An extended quantum field theory A is invertible if and
only if it factors uniquely through A : CobF
n −→ Pic2 (2VectC ) ,→ 2VectC .
We can pick an equivalence of 2-categories Pic2 (2VectC ) −→ B2 C× by choosing a
non-canonical equivalence between every invertible 2-vector space and VectC . This
identifies every invertible linear functor between invertible 2-vector spaces with a one
dimensional vector space. Picking a linear isomorphism from every 1-dimensional
vector space to C induces this equivalence. An inverse to this equivalence is given by
the embedding ι : B2 C× −→ Pic2 (2VectC ). The invertibililty of the anomaly quantum
field theory A and this equivalence induces a 2-cocycle of the symmetry groupoid
with values in C× :
2 ×
αA : SymF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ B C .

(2.105)

The cohomology class of this 2-cocycle is independent of the choices involved: let
φ, φ0 : Pic2 (2VectC ) −→ B2 C× be two equivalences of bicategories which both have
the inclusion ι : B2 C× −→ Pic2 (2VectC ) as weak inverse. We then get a chain of
natural isomorphisms
φ =⇒ φ ◦ ι ◦ φ0 =⇒ φ0

(2.106)

inducing a natural isomorphism αA =⇒ α0A , which is by Remark 2.96 a coboundary.
Combining these facts with Proposition 2.103 we can then infer
Proposition 2.107. Every anomalous quantum field theory Z : 1 =⇒ tr A induces
A
a projective representation of the symmetry groupoid SymF
n,n−1,n−2 . The 2-cocycle α
corresponding to this representation is unique up to coboundary.
We have seen in Proposition 2.103 that natural 2-transformations 1 =⇒ α are the
same as projective representations of groupoids, so it should come as no surprise that
these cocycles appear in the description of anomalies. The interesting prospect is that
we can extend these cocycles to invertible extended field theories. This allows us to
calculate quantities related to anomalies using the machinery of extended quantum
field theories. Furthermore, we can couple such a theory to a bulk theory cancelling
the anomaly as we explain in the next section. It is not clear that every anomaly
admits such an extension, but all anomalies should give a projective representation
of the symmetry groupoid.
42

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

2.2.3

Anomaly inflow in functorial field theories

The definition of an anomalous functorial quantum field theory (Definition 2.67)
only depends on the truncation of the extended invertible field theory A. One could
wonder why we still require A to be a full field theory and indeed the definition of a
twisted field theory due to Stolz and Teichner [49] only requires a functor from the
truncated cobordism category. The advantage of having a full quantum field theory
is that the evaluation on n-dimensional manifolds allows for interesting constructions
related to the anomalous field theory. The most important example is the coupling
of bulk and boundary degrees of freedom to produce anomaly-free field theories. We
shall now discuss in more detail how to couple the bulk field theory A and boundary
field theory Z to construct an anomaly-free theory. We start with the unextended
framework corresponding to Definition 2.69. This involves the full quantum field
theory A : CobF
n −→ VectC and not just its truncation.
n
n−1
n−1
) −→ ∅.
Let (Σ, f ) be an object of CobF
n and (M, f ) a morphism (Σ, f
In particular, M is an n-dimensional manifold with boundary ∂M = −Σ, and
background gauge fields f n ∈ F (M ) extending the background gauge field f n−1
on the boundary. An anomalous field theory Z : 1 =⇒ tr A defines an element
Z(Σ, f n−1 ) ∈ A(Σ, f n−1 ). The partition function of the composite system can now
be defined as
Zbb (M, f n , Σ) = A(M, f n )[Z(Σ, f n−1 )] ∈ A(∅) ∼
=C.

(2.108)

This definition does not depend on any additional choices.
Proposition 2.109. The combined partition function Zbb (M, f n , Σ) is invariant under F -diffeomorphism, which do not need to be the identity at the boundary.5
Proof. Let (M 0 , f 0n ) be a morphism (Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) −→ ∅ and ν : (M, f n ) −→ (M 0 , f 0n ) a
F -diffeomorphism. We then calculate
Zbb (M 0 , f 0n , Σ0 ) = A(M 0 , f 0n )[Z(Σ0 , f 0n−1 )]
= A(M 0 , f 0n ) ◦ A(ν|Σ )[Z(Σ, f n−1 )]
(2.110)
n

= A(M, f )[Z(Σ, f

n−1

)]

= Zbb (M, f n , Σ) ,
where in the second equality we used (2.71) and in the third equality the fact that
A is invariant under F -diffeomorphisms relative to the boundary. This shows that
the composite partition function is anomaly-free.
5

However, they need to be compatible with the collars, i.e. invariant.

43

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

Definition 2.67 also allows us to formulate the composite system at the level
of state spaces. Let A : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC be an invertible extended field
theory. Consider a 1-morphism (Σ, f n−1 ) : (S, f n−2 ) −→ ∅. An anomalous field theory
Z : 1 −→ tr A defines an element Z(S, f n−2 ) ∈ A(S, f n−2 ). The composite state space
is given by
Zbb (Σ, f n−1 , S) = A(Σ, f n−1 )[Z(S, f n−2 )] ∈ A(∅) ∼
= VectC .

(2.111)

This vector space does not depend on any additional choices. To construct an honest
action on the combined state space, the following observation (which we will also use
later on) is helpful:
Lemma 2.112. Let
(Σ, f, , ϕ− , ϕ+ ) : (S− , − , , f− ) −→ (S+ , + , , f+ )

(2.113)

(Σ0 , f 0 , , ϕ0− , ϕ0+ ) : (S−0 , − , , f−0 ) −→ (S+0 , + , , f+0 )

(2.114)

and

be 1-morphisms in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 . Furthermore, let id ×ν : ((−, )×Σ, f ) −→ ((−, )×
Σ0 , f 0 ) be an F -diffeomorphism constant on the collars. Then
(S− , − , , f− )

(Σ,f )

ν|S−

(S+ , + , , f+ )
(2.115)

ν|S+

(S−0 , − , , f−0 ) (Σ0 ,f 0 ) (S+0 , + , , f+0 )
commutes up to a limit 2-morphism corresponding to ν.
Proof. This follows directly from the commutativity of
(−, ) × Σ

(−, ) × [0, − ) × S−

id ×(ϕ+ ◦ν|−1
0 )
S+

id ×ϕ−

(−, ) × (−+ , 0] × S+0

id ×ν

id ×(ϕ0− ◦ν|S− )

(2.116)

id ×ϕ0+
0

(−, ) × Σ

In the previous lemma we were careful to include all the necessary ’s. In
the reminder of this section we return to suppressing them in the notation. Let
(Σ, f n−1 ) : (S, f n−2 ) −→ ∅ and (Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) : (S 0 , f 0n−2 ) −→ ∅ be a 1-morphisms in
44

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories
n−1
) −→ (Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) a F -diffeomorphism. Then there is
CobF
n,n−1,n−2 and ν : (Σ, f
an induced linear map Zbb (ν)


A(ν)
Zbb (Σ, f n−1 , S) = A(Σ, f n−1 )[Z(S, f n−2 )] −−→ A (Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) ◦ ν|S [Z(S, f n−2 )]
−−→ A(Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) ◦ A(ν|S )[Z(S, f n−2 )]
Z(ν|S )

−−−−→ A(Σ0 , f 0n−1 )[Z(S 0 , f 0n−2 )] = Zbb (Σ0 , f 0n−1 , S 0 ) ,
(2.117)
where the first map is induced by the limit 2-morphism constructed in Lemma 2.112.
Theorem 2.118. The linear maps Z(ν) provide an honest representation of the
groupoid of F -background fields on 1-morphisms to ∅ and their symmetries, i.e.
F -diffeomorphisms.
Proof. Let νa : (Σ, f n−1 ) −→ (Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) and νb : (Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) −→ (Σ00 , f 00n−1 ) be F diffeomorphisms as above. The composition

A(νa )
A(Σ, f n−1 )[Z(S, f n−2 )] −−−→ A (Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) ◦ νa |S [Z(S, f n−2 )]
−−→ A(Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) ◦ A(νa |S )[Z(S, f n−2 )]
Z(νa |S )

−−−−→ A(Σ0 , f 0n−1 )[Z(S 0 , f 0n−2 )]
(2.119)
A(νb )


−−−→ A (Σ00 , f 00n−1 ) ◦ νb |S 0 [Z(S 0 , f 0n−2 )]
−−→ A(Σ00 , f 00n−1 ) ◦ A(νb |S 0 )[Z(S 0 , f 0n−2 )]
Z(νb | 0 )

S
−−−−
→ A(Σ00 , f 00n−1 )[Z(S 00 , f 00n−2 )]

can be rewritten using the commutativity of linear maps corresponding to natural

45

Chapter 2: Description of anomalies via extended functorial quantum field theories

transformations applied at different positions in the composition of functors as

A(νa )
A(Σ, f n−1 )[Z(S, f n−2 )] −−−→ A (Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) ◦ νa |S [Z(S, f n−2 )]
−−→ A(Σ0 , f 0n−1 ) ◦ A(νa |S )[Z(S, f n−2 )]
A(νb )

−−−→ A(Σ00 , f 00n−1 ) ◦ A(νb |S 0 ) ◦ A(νa |S )[Z(S, f n−2 )]

(2.120)

Z(νa |S )

−−−−→ A(Σ00 , f 00n−1 ) ◦ A(νb |S 0 )[Z(S 0 , f 0n−2 )]
Z(νb | 0 )

S
−−−−
→ A(Σ00 , f 00n−1 )[Z(S 00 , f 00n−2 )] .

Next we use that A is a 2-functor and Equation (2.75) to rewrite this as

A(νb ◦νa )
A(Σ, f n−1 )[Z(S, f n−2 )] −−−−−→ A (Σ00 , f 00n−1 ) ◦ (νb ◦ νa )|S [Z(S, f n−2 )]
−−→ A(Σ00 , f 00n−1 ) ◦ A((νb ◦ νa )|S )[Z(S, f n−2 )]

(2.121)

Z((νb ◦νa )|S )

−−−−−−−→ A(Σ00 , f 00n−1 )[Z(S 00 , f 00n−2 )] .
This finishes the proof.
This theorem describes a way of coupling bulk and boundary degrees of freedom to
an anomaly-free state space. In condensed matter physics applications the invertible
field theory A arises as the low-energy effective theory of the bulk system.

46

Chapter 3
The parity anomaly
In this chapter we deploy the general theory developed in Chapter 2 to describe the
parity anomaly of fermionic gauge theories defined on odd-dimensional manifolds.
The parity anomaly has recently received renewed interest due to its relation to
topological insulators and more generally topological phases of matter [11]. The
anomaly field theory can be constructed using the index of a Dirac operator on even
dimensional manifolds.
In Section 3.1 we collect some results about index theory on manifolds with
boundaries, which suffice to construct a non-extended field theory describing the
parity anomaly in Section 3.2. To capture the Hamiltonian perspective, we use the
index theorem on manifolds with corners [60] reviewed in Section 3.3 to construct an
extended field theory describing the parity anomaly in Section 3.4. The Hamiltonian
description of the parity anomaly has been largely unexplored in the literature with
the exception of [92] and the recent study in [93]. One of the achievements of our
approach is the computation of the 2-cocycle twisting the projective representation
of the symmetry group on the state space of any quantum field theory with parity
anomaly in terms of geometric quantities, see Equation (3.126).

3.1

Index theory part I: the APS-index theorem

The description of the extended field theory encoding the parity anomaly relies on
index theory for manifolds with corners. In this section we present the theory on
manifolds with boundaries. This is already enough to formulate the invertible field
theory in the non-extended setting.
We set the stage by recalling a few standard definitions related to spin geometry
mostly following [94].
Definition 3.1. Let V be a vector space equipped with a quadratic form q : V −→ R.
The Clifford algebra C`(V, q) is the quotient of the tensor algebra
∞
M
T (V ) =
V ⊗i
(3.2)
i=0

47

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

by the ideal generated by elements of the form v ⊗ v + q(v)1 for v ∈ V .
Note that the N-grading of T (V ) induces a natural Z2 -grading
M
C`(V, q) = C`0 (V, q)
C`1 (V, q)

(3.3)

of the Clifford algebra C`(V, q).
Example 3.4. Let V be the vector space Rn and q the quadratic form induced by
the canonical scalar product hei , ej i = δij on Rn . The corresponding Clifford algebra,
which we denote by C`n , is generated by the elements {ei }i=0,...,n modulo the relations
{ei , ej } := ei · ej + ej · ei = −2δij .

(3.5)

We can identify the vector space underlying the exterior algebra Λ∗ Rn with C`n via
the linear map
Λ∗ Rn −→ C`n
(3.6)
d ei1 ∧ · · · ∧ d eik 7−→ ei1 · · · · · eik .
However, this is not an isomorphism of algebras.
The Pin group Pinn is the subgroup of the unit group C`×
n of C`n generated by
all elements v ∈ V with q(v) = 1. The Spin group Spinn is the intersection of Pinn
with C`0n in C`n . The group Spinn acts via conjugation on C`n . This action preserves
the subspace Rn ⊂ C`n , its orientation and the canonical scalar product on it. For
this reason, we get an induced group homomorphism Spinn −→ SO(n). One can
show [94, Theorem 2.9] that this morphism fits into a short exact sequence
1 −→ Z2 −→ Spinn −→ SO(n) −→ 1 .

(3.7)

Let Cln = C`n ⊗R C be the complexified Clifford algebra. The representation theory
of Cln is extremely well-behaved [94, Section I.5] due to the following periodicity
result.
Theorem 3.8 (Theorem 4.3 of [94]). For all n ≥ 0 there are isomorphisms
Cln+2 ∼
= Cln ⊗C Cl2

(3.9)

of algebras.
Together with Cl1 = C ⊕ C and Cl2 = C(2), where C(2) is the complex algebra
of 2 × 2-matrices with complex coefficients, this theorem completely classifies complexified Clifford algebras. This implies that Clifford algebras are semisimple, for
n = 2k there is only one non-trivial irreducible representation of Cln of dimension
2k and for n = 2k + 1 there are two non-trivial irreducible representations of Cln of
dimension 2k .
48

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

...

...

(a) Dk

(b) Bk

Figure 3.1: Dynkin diagram for the Lie algebra of Spinn .
Definition 3.10. The complex spin representation ∆n : Spinn −→ EndC (S) is the
restriction of a non-trivial irreducible representation S of Cln to Spinn . For odd n
this definition does not depend on the choice of representation.
Example 3.11.
• The 1-dimensional Spin group is Spin1 = Z2 = {±1}. The
spin representation is the sign representation of Z2 on C.
• The 2-dimensional Spin group is Spin2 = U (1). The map Spin2 −→ SO(2) =
U (1) is given by sending u ∈ U (1) to u2 . The spin representation is given by
multiplication U (1) × C2 −→ C2 .
• The 3-dimensional Spin group is SU (2). The 2-dimensional spin representation
is the fundamental representation of SU (2) on C2 .
Remark 3.12. Let n be larger or equal to 3. The Lie-algebra of Spinn is described
by the Dynkin diagram Dk for n = 2k and Bk for n = 2k +1, see Figure 3.1. For n =
2k + 1 the spin representation is the exponential of the fundamental representation
attached to the right most vertex. For n = 2k the spin representation is the direct
sum of the fundamental representations of the two right most vertices [95].
The previous remark shows that for even n > 3 the Spin representation is reducible. A way to distinguish the two irreducible subrepresentations is through the
for n even or
chirality operator Γ = i m e1 · · · · · en ∈ Cln with m = n2 or m = n+1
2
odd, respectively. It is straightforward to check that Γ2 = id, Γv = −vΓ for even n
and Γv = vΓ for odd n. For n even, the spin representation S decomposes into the
positive and negative eigenspace for the action of Γ: S = S + ⊕ S − , where S + and
S − are the two irreducible representations of Spinn building up S.
Let M be a compact oriented n-dimensional manifold with Riemannian metric
g ∈ Γ(Sym2 (T ∗ M )). The metric induces a reduction of the frame bundle to an SO(n)bundle PSO(n) . A spin-structure on M is a principal Spinn bundle PSpinn together with
a map PSpinn −→ PSO(n) compatible with the map Spinn −→ SO(n). A manifold
together with the choice of a spin structure is called a spin manifold. The spinor
bundle SM on a spin manifold M is the associated vector bundle to PSpinn for the
+
−
spin representation. For even dimensional spin manifolds it decomposes as SM
⊕ SM
.
Pulling back the Levi-Civita connection on PSO(n) along the map PSpinn −→ PSO(n)
induces a connection on PSpinn and SM . We call this connection the spin-connection.
The group SO(n) acts on the Clifford algebra C`n and its complexification Cln
allowing us to define for every oriented Riemannian manifold associated Clifford
49

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

bundles C`M and ClM . If furthermore M is a spin manifold the Clifford bundle ClM
acts naturally on the spinor bundle SM , see e.g. [94, Section II.3] for details.
Let G be a compact Lie group with Lie algebra g. We fix a unitary finite dimensional representation ρG : G −→ End(V ) of G. Furthermore, let M be an oriented
n-dimensional spin manifold with Riemannian metric g ∈ Γ(Sym2 (T ∗ M )) equipped
with a principal G-bundle PM with connection AM ∈ Ω1 (PM ; g). We denote by
h·, ·i : T ∗ M −→ T M the isomorphism between the cotangent and tangent bundle
G
induced by g. We define the twisted spinor bundle to be SM
= S ⊗ V , where V is
the associated vector bundle to P and the representation ρG . The spin connection
G
G
and the connection on P induce a connection ∇SM on SM
. This data defines a Dirac
/ M on M as the following composition
operator D
G
Γ SM

G
 ∇SM
 h·,·i
 ·

G
G
G
−→ Γ T ∗ M ⊗ SM
−→ Γ T M ⊗ SM
−→ Γ SM

(3.13)

where · denotes the Clifford action of the tangent bundle on the spinor bundle, which
is induced by considering the tangent bundle as a subbundle of the Clifford bundle
/ M in terms of a local orthonormal frames {e1 , . . . en } of
C`M . We can also express D
T M as
n
X
SG
/M =
D
ei · ∇eiM .
(3.14)
i=1

Example 3.15. The spinor bundle on R3 is the trivial vector bundle R3 × C2 . The
3-dimensional Dirac operator is
/ R3 = i (σx ∂x + σy ∂y + σz ∂z ) ,
D
where σi are the Pauli matrices



0
0 1
σx =
, σy =
1 0
i

−i
0



(3.16)


and

σz =


1 0
.
0 −1

(3.17)

+
−
For even dimension n, the splitting of the spinor bundle SM = SM
⊕ SM
induces
G+
G−
G
a splitting of SM
= SM
⊕ SM
into positive and negative chirality spinors; the
Dirac operator is odd with respect to this Z2 -grading. On a closed manifold M , the
G+
G−
1
2
/+
chiral Dirac operator D
M : H (SM ) −→ L (SM ) is a first order elliptic differential
G+
G+
operator, where H 1 (SM
) is the first Sobolev space of sections of SM
, i.e. spinors Ψ
+
G−
2
/ M Ψ is square-integrable, and L (SM ) is the Hilbert space of squarewhose image D
G−
integrable sections of SM
; the integration is with respect to the Hermitian structure
G
on SM
induced by the metric and the unitary representation ρG . Every elliptic
operator acting on sections of a vector bundle of finite rank over a closed manifold
M is Fredholm. For every Fredholm operator D the index is defined by

ind(D) = dim ker(D) − dim coker(D) .
+

/ M in terms of local
The Atiyah-Singer index theorem [96] expresses the index of D
quantities:
50

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly
+

/ M is given by
Theorem 3.18. The index of D
Z
+
/ M) =
ind(D
KAS

(3.19)

M

where the Atiyah-Singer density


b TM
KAS = ch V ∧ A
n
is the homogeneous differential form of top degree in Ωn (M ) occurring in the exterior
b
product of the Chern character of the vector bundle V associated to PM with the Agenus of the tangent bundle T M .
Even-though the concrete form of KAS will not be important for the rest of
this thesis (we only need the existence of such a differential form) we briefly define the characteristic classes involved. Let W −→ M be a vector bundle over M
W
and ∇W : Γ(W ) −→ Γ(T ∗ M ⊗ W ) a connection on W . We denote by K ∇ ∈
Ω2 (M ; End(W )) the curvature of ∇W . The Chern character of W ch(∇W ) ∈ Ω• (M )
is

 ∇W 
∈ Ω• (M ) ,
(3.20)
ch(W ) := tr exp K2π i
where the exponential is defined by the usual power series. Note that this is welldefined, since only finitely many terms in the power series are non zero. Furthermore,
b
the cohomology class ch(∇W ) is independent of the concrete choice of ∇W . The Ab ) ∈ Ω• (M ) is defined by the expression
genus A(W
!
∇W
1
K
/2
b ) := det 2
A(W
∈ Ω• (M ) .
(3.21)
sinh(K ∇W /2)
Again the expression has to be understood in terms of its Taylor expansion and its
cohomology class is independent of the choice of ∇W .
We now turn our attention to manifolds with boundary. Let M be an n-dimensional
oriented Riemannian manifold equipped with a spin structure and boundary ∂M . Recall that the spin structure consists of a double cover of the frame bundle PSO(n) (M )
by a principal Spinn -bundle PSpinn (M ) −→ M . We can include the frame bundle
PSO(n−1) (∂M ) into PSO(n) (M ) by adding the inward pointing normal vector to an
orthonormal frame of ∂M . The pullback of the double cover PSpinn (M ) along this
inclusion induces a spin structure on ∂M .
We assume from now on that all structures are of product form on a fixed collar
of the boundary ∂M . To describe the relation between the Dirac operator on the
boundary and on the bulk manifold we use the embedding of Clifford bundles
C`∂M −→ C`M ,

Tx (∂M ) 3 v 7−→ v nx ,

51

(3.22)

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

where n is the inward pointing normal vector field corresponding to the collar. This
gives SM ∂M the structure of a Clifford bundle over ∂M . For the relation to the spinor
bundle over the boundary we need to distinguish between even and odd dimensions.
If the dimension n of M is odd then we can identify SM ∂M with the spinor bundle
over ∂M . In this case the Dirac operator can be described in a neighbourhood of
∂M by

/M = n · D
/ ∂M + ∂n .
D
(3.23)
On the other hand, if the dimension n of M is even then the spinor bundle SM =
+
−
SM
⊕ SM
decomposes into spinors of positive and negative chirality. The Clifford
action of C`∂M leaves this decomposition invariant and we can identify the spinor
+
bundle over ∂M with the pullback of the positive spinor bundle SM
. As the
∂M
Clifford action of C`∂M commutes with the chirality operator Γ, an identification
with the negative spinor bundle is possible as well. Near the boundary the Dirac
operator is given by


/ ∂M + ∂n
D
0
/M = n ·
D
(3.24)
/ ∂M Γ|S − + ∂n .
0
Γ|S + D
M

M

/ M to manifolds with boundary one runs into the
When trying to extend the index of D
problem that the Dirac operator on a manifold with boundary is never Fredholm.
This can be solved by introducing suitable boundary condition. We will explain
an alternative solution via attaching cylindrical ends.1 We are mostly interested
in the situation when M is a cobordism, which comes with a decomposition of its
boundary ∂M = ∂M+ t ∂M− and corresponding collars [0, ) × Σ− −→ M and
(−0 , 0] × Σ+ −→ M . We define

c = M t∂M (−∞, 0] × Σ− t [0, ∞) × Σ+ ,
M

(3.25)

where we use the collar and the fact that all structures on it are of product form
to perform the gluing. We extend the metric, spin structure and principal bundle
c. The structure of the collars of the cobordism
with connection as products to M
makes it natural to attach inward and outward pointing cylinders to the incoming
and outgoing boundary, respectively, contrary to what is normally done in the index
theory literature. It is further natural, again in contrast to what is normally done
in index theory, to glue the cylinders along the identification of the collars with
cylinders; this means that the gluing could “twist” bundles. Alternatively, we could
first attach a mapping cylinder for the identification and then an infinite cylinder.
G+
G−
1
2
/+
The Dirac operator D
c : H (SM
c ) −→ L (SM
c ) is Fredholm if and only if the
M
kernel of the induced Dirac operator on the boundary of M is trivial [61]. If the
1

This is equivalent to the introduction of Atiyah-Patodi-Singer spectral boundary conditions on
the spinors [62]. We use the method of cylindrical ends, since it can be generalised to manifolds
with corners and gives a natural cancellation of certain terms later on.

52

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

kernel is non-trivial, then we have to regularize the index in an appropriate way,
which corresponds physically to introducing small masses for the massless fermions
c. This is done precisely by picking, for every connected component ∂Mi of the
on M
boundary, a small number αi with 0 < αi < δi , where δi is the smallest magnitude
|λi | of the non-zero eigenvalues λi of the induced Dirac operator on ∂Mi . Now we
can attach weights e αi si to the integration measure on the cylindrical ends, where
si is the coordinate on the cylinder over ∂Mi . Denoting the corresponding weighted
G+
G−
α·s 2
2
Sobolev spaces by e α·s H 1 (SM
L (SM
c ) and e
c ), we then have
Theorem 3.26. ([97, Theorem 5.60]) The Dirac operator


G−
G+
α·s 1
/+
−→ e α·s L2 SM
D
H SM
c: e
c
c
M
is Fredholm and its index is independent of the masses αi .
There is an extension of the index theorem to the case of manifolds with boundary.
One new ingredient is the η-invariant of the Dirac operator on a closed manifold Σ
of odd dimension equipped with appropriate geometric structures which calculates
/ Σ,
the number of positive eigenvalues minus the number of negative eigenvalues of D
and is defined by
X

sign(λ)
/ Σ = lim
.
(3.27)
η D
s→0
|λ|s
/ Σ)
λ∈spec(D
λ6=0

The limit here should be
as the value of the analytic continuation of the
Punderstood
sign(λ)
meromorphic function λ6=0 |λ|s at s = 0; the regularity of this value is proven
in [62]. The η-invariant can be reformulated as an integral over the trace of the
corresponding heat kernel operator as
Z ∞



1
2
/Σ = √
/ Σ e −t D/ Σ dt .
η D
t−1/2 Tr D
(3.28)
π 0
Now we can formulate the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index theorem for manifolds where
the cylindrical ends are attached along the identity:
+

/M
Theorem 3.29 (Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index theorem [62]). The index of D
c can
be computed by the concrete formula:
Z




1
+
/ M̂ d,1 =
/ ∂M + dim ker D
/ ∂− M − dim ker D
/ ∂+ M
η D
ind D
.
KAS −
2
M
(3.30)
Remark 3.31. The sign difference between the dimensions of the kernels in (3.30)
comes from the fact that we attach cylinders with opposite orientation to the incoming
and outgoing boundary; this corresponds to a negative sign for the numbers αi on the
outgoing boundary ∂+ M in the version of the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index theorem
given in [97].
2

To be more precise, we have to first attach a mapping cylinder before we can apply [97, Theorem
5.60].

53

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

3.2

Path integral description

In this section we will use the index theory for manifolds with boundaries reviewed
in the previous section to construct an invertible functorial quantum field theory
describing the parity-anomaly. For this we fix a compact Lie group G and a unitary
representation ρG : G −→ End(V ) describing the matter content of the theory with
anomaly.
The background fields consist of an orientation, a metric, a spin structure and a
principal G-bundle with connection described by the stack3
F = Bun∇
G × Met × Spin × Or .

(3.32)

The stack F -describes exactly the geometric structures required in Section 3.1 to
/ M . The field theory is defined on the category CobF
define the Dirac operator D
n constructed in Section 2.1.1 where we make the additional assumption that all structures
are of product form on the collars; not just invariant. We make this assumption so
that the index theory discussed in the previous section can be applied. By a slight
abuse of notation we denote this category again by CobF
n . The theory
Aζparity : CobF
n −→ VectC

(3.33)

depends on a complex parameter ζ ∈ C× . It assigns to every object Σ ∈ CobF
n the
one dimensional vector space C.
To a regular morphism M : ∅ −→ ∅, i.e. a closed manifold equipped with background fields we assign the linear map
Aζparity (M ) : C −→ C,

+

z 7→ ζ ind(D/ M ) · z .

(3.34)

c
Let M : Σ− −→ Σ+ be regular morphisms in CobF
n . Recall that M is constructed
from M by attached cylindrical ends of the form (∞, 0] × Σ− and [0, ∞) × Σ+ to M
using the identification of [0, − ) × Σ− t (−+ , 0] × Σ+ with a collar of ∂M which
is part of the regular morphism M . Alternatively, we could first attach a mapping
cylinder for the identification and then an infinite cylinder.
Having at hand the well-defined notion of an index for manifolds with boundaries
in the form of Theorem 3.26, we can now define
Aζparity (M ) : C −→ C ,

/+

z 7−→ ζ ind(DMc) · z .

(3.35)

We assign to a limit morphism φ the value of Aζparity on a corresponding mapping
cylinder; in order for Aζparity to be well-defined, this construction must then be independent of the length of the mapping cylinder. We prove this as part of
Theorem 3.36. Aζparity : CobF
n −→ VectC is an invertible quantum field theory.
3

This stack is not really of product form, since the spin structure depends on the choice of
Riemannian metric.

54

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

Proof. The value of Aζparity on a mapping cylinder is independent of its length, since
the manifolds constructed by attaching cylindrical ends are F -diffeomorphic. This
proves that Aζparity is well-defined on limit morphisms φ.
If we cut a manifold M along a hypersurface H into two pieces M1 and M2 , then
from the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index theorem (3.30) we get4



/+
/+
/+
ind D
c2 ,
c1 + ind D
c = ind D
M
M
M

(3.37)



/ −Σ , where −Σ is the manifold
/ Σ = −η D
since the integration is additive and η D
Σ with opposite orientation. The contributions from the boundary along which the
cutting takes place cancel in (3.30) because of the opposite signs of the dimensions
of the kernel of the boundary Dirac operator for incoming and outgoing boundaries.
For regular morphisms M : Σ1 −→ Σ2 and M 0 : Σ2 −→ Σ3 , we can cut the
manifold M 0 ◦ M into M and M 0 , with the collar around Σ2 removed and mapping
cylinders corresponding to the identification attached. This uses the description of
the gluing process in terms of mapping cylinders (see Section 2.1.1), but as mentioned
earlier, the index of such pieces is the same as the index corresponding to a manifold
where the attachment is twisted by the identification of the collars with cylinders.
This implies



Aζparity M 0 ◦ M = Aζparity M 0 · Aζparity M .
(3.38)
This proves that Aζparity is a functor, which is furthermore symmetric monoidal since
all our constructions are multiplicative under disjoint unions.  The inverse functor
−1
−1
(with respect to the tensor product of field theories) is Aζparity
= Aζparity .
Remark 3.39. It may seem unnatural for Aζparity to assign the one-dimensional
vector space C to every closed n−1-dimensional manifold Σ. Rather one would expect
a complex line generated by all boundary conditions via an inverse limit construction
as for example in [37, 71]. Assigning C to every closed manifold is only possible due
to the presence of canonical APS-boundary conditions related to the L2 -condition on
c.
the non-compact manifolds M
Partition functions and symmetry-protected topological phases
We turn our attention now to the partition function for a quantum field theory with
parity anomaly. According to Definition 2.69, it is a natural symmetric monoidal
ζ
: 1 =⇒ tr Aζparity . This yields, for every closed n−1-dimensional
transformation Zparity
manifold Σ equipped with background fields, a linear map
ζ
Zparity
(Σ) : C −→ Aζparity (Σ) = C .

(3.40)

For this we need a cylindrical neighbourhood of H on which all of the field content F is of
product form.
4

55

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

ζ
A linear map Zparity
(Σ) : C −→ C can be canonically identified with a complex numζ
ber Zparity (Σ) ∈ C. There is no ambiguity in the definition of the partition function
as a complex number. The essence of the parity anomaly, like most anomalies associated with the breaking of a classical symmetry in quantum field theory, is the
ζ
lack of invariance of Zparity
under limit morphisms φ: the naturality of the partition
function implies that it transforms under gauge transformations φ by multiplication
with a 1-cocycle Aζparity (φ) ∈ C× ; note that in the present context ‘gauge transformations’ also refer to isometries and isomorphisms of the spinor bundle SΣ . Since
Aζparity depends only on topological data, this multiplication is given by
/+

Aζparity (φ) = ζ ind(DM(Σ,φ) )

(3.41)

where M(Σ, φ) is the corresponding mapping torus constructed by identifying the
boundary components of [0, 1] × Σ using φ.
We shall now illustrate how the functorial formalism of this section connects with
the more conventional treatments of the parity anomaly in the physics literature,
following [11] (see also [98]); indeed, what mathematicians call ‘invertible quantum
field theories’ are known as ‘short-range entangled topological phases’ to physicists.
A partition function with parity anomaly can be defined by fixing its value on a
representative for every gauge equivalence class of field configurations and applying
(3.41) to determine all other values. Now consider the partition function with parity
anomaly defined by


(−1)
/Σ
Zparity Σ = det D
(3.42)
for an arbitrary chosen background (AΣ , gΣ ) in every gauge equivalence class, where
the definition of the determinant requires a suitable regularization. Formally, this is
the absolute value of the contribution to the path integral measure from a massless
Dirac fermion in n − 1 dimensions coupled to a background (AΣ , gΣ ). There is

(−1)
an ambiguity in defining the phase of Zparity Σ . Time-reversal (or space-reflection)

(−1)
symmetry forces Zparity Σ to be real. Here we chose the phase to make the partition
function positive at the fixed representative.
From a physical perspective, having set the phase of the partition function at a
fixed background (AΣ , gΣ ) we can calculate the phase at a gauge equivalent configuration φ(AΣ , gΣ ), by following the path
(1 − t) (AΣ , gΣ ) + t φ(AΣ , gΣ ) ,

t ∈ [0, 1]

(3.43)

in the configuration space of the field theory, and changing the sign every time an
eigenvalue of the Dirac operator crosses through zero. It is well-known that this spectral flow can be calculated by the index of the Dirac operator on the corresponding
mapping cylinder [62]. This physical intuition is formalised by the definition above
for ζ = −1: The phase ambiguity is determined by requiring the partition function
to define a natural symmetric monoidal transformation.
56

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

We can preserve gauge invariance by using Pauli-Villars regularization [11] leading
to the gauge invariant partition function


/ Σ (−1)η(D/ Σ )/2 .
Zparity Σ = det D
(3.44)
The global parity anomaly is due to the fact that the fermion path integral is in general not a real number, whereas classical orientation-reversal (or ‘parity’) symmetry,
which acts by complex conjugation on path integrals, would imply that the path
integral is real. Hence, the parity anomaly can be understood as the result that it is
not possible to quantize the theory in such a way that gauge symmetry and parity
symmetry are preserved.
We can now apply the general framework from Section 2.2.3 to cancel the parity
anomaly: We combine bulk and boundary degrees of freedom by introducing for the
bulk fields the action
Z

Sbulk M = i π
KAS ,
(3.45)
M

where M is a regular morphism from Σ to ∅, i.e. ∂M = −Σ. Then after integrating
out the boundary fermion fields, the contribution to the path integral measure for
the combined system is given by

(−1)
(−1)
Zbb M = Zparity (M )[Zparity (Σ)]
/Σ
= det D



+

(−1)ind(D/ M̂ )
(3.46)

/ Σ ) exp
= det(D

 iπ
2



/Σ − iπ
η D

Z
KAS



M


/ Σ (−1)η(D/ Σ )/2 e −Sbulk (M ) ,
= det D

/ Σ is zero as soon as the kernel of D
/ Σ is non-trivial and
where we used that det D
the Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index formula (3.30). This expression is real. Thus the
combined bulk-boundary system is invariant under orientation-reversal and gauge
transformations, since now its path integral is real, due to ‘anomaly inflow’ from
the bulk to the boundary. In particular, the non-anomalous partition function of
(−1)
the combined system requires the full n-dimensional quantum field theory Aparity ,
(−1)
rather than just the truncation trAparity in which the original partition function
(−1)
Zparity lives, to be well defined. Looking at this from a different perspective, we see
that the existence of an effective long wavelength action (3.45) for the bulk gauge
and gravitational fields implies the existence of gapless charged boundary fermions
with an anomaly cancelling the anomaly of the bulk quantum field theory under
orientation-reversing transformations.
57

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

This example provides a simple model for the general feature of some topological
states of matter: Symmetry-protected topological phases in n dimensions are related
to global anomalies in n − 1 dimensions. In the simplest case n = 2, the quantum
mechanical time-reversal anomaly on the 0 + 1-dimensional boundary is encoded
by the 1 + 1-dimensional symmetry-protected topological phase in the bulk whose
topological response action (3.45) evaluates to i π Φ, where Φ is the magnetic flux of
the background gauge field through M . This sets the two-dimensional θ-angle equal
to π.
For the n = 4 example of the time-reversal (or space-reflection) invariant 3 + 1dimensional fermionic topological insulator with 2+1-dimensional boundary [11], the
integral of the Atiyah-Singer index density KAS in four dimensions yields the sum of
the instanton number I of the background gauge field and a gravitational contribution related to the signature σ of the four-manifold M [87]. For the cancellation of the
parity anomaly we had to introduce the term i π I in the action, which is the anticipated statement that the θ-angle parameterising the axionic response action is equal
to π inside a topological insulator. The bulk-boundary correspondence discussed
above then resembles the well-known situation from three-dimensional Chern-Simons
theory, to which the bulk theory reduces on ∂M = Σ [57, 58].
The present formalism generalises this perspective to systematically construct
quantum field theories with global parity symmetry that characterise gapless charged
fermionic boundary states of certain symmetry-protected topological phases of matter in all higher even dimensions n ≥ 6. Indeed, the anomaly of a quantum field theory in n = 2k dimensions involving an action that integrates the Atiyah-Singer index
density KAS reduces on the boundary ∂M = Σ to coupled combinations of gauge and
gravitational Chern-Simons type terms. The bulk action (3.45) will now also involve
couplings between gauge and gravitational degrees of freedom through intricate combinations of Chern and Pontryagin classes, such that the bulk symmetry-protected
topological phase completely captures the parity anomaly of the boundary theory.
Some examples of such mixed gauge-gravity phases can be found e.g. in [99].

3.3

Index theory part II: manifolds with corners
(−1)

In the remainder of this chapter we extend the field theory Aparity to also capture the
parity anomaly at the Hamiltonian level. It should not come as a surprise that this
involves index theory on manifolds with corners, which we review in this section. We
will present the index theory already tailored to the construction of an extended field
theory in the next section, i.e. we formulate the results for regular 2-morphisms in the
bicategory CobF
n,n−1,n−2 again assuming that all structures are of product form on the
collars. Furthermore, we make the technical assumption that the index of the Dirac
operator on all corners vanishes. We use an index theorem for manifolds with corners
based on b-geometry. Before stating the theorem we provide some background on
b-geometry.

58

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

3.3.1

b-Geometry

b-geometry (for ‘boundary geometry’) is concerned with the study of geometric structures on manifolds with corners which can be singular at the boundary. We fix an
n-dimensional h2i-manifold M and an ordering of its connected faces {H1 , . . . , Hk }.
The central objects in b-geometry are b-vector fields. These are vector fields which
are tangent to all boundary hypersurfaces. We denote by Vectb (M ) the projective
C ∞ (M )-module of b-vector fields. Then Vectb (M ) is closed under the Lie bracket of
vector fields. By the Serre-Swan theorem, the b-vector fields are naturally sections
of the b-tangent bundle with fibres
b

Tx M := Vectb (M ) \ Ix (M ) · Vectb (M ) ,

(3.47)

where Ix (M ) = {f ∈ C ∞ (M ) | f (x) = 0} is the ideal of functions vanishing at
x ∈ M . This allows us to define arbitrary b-tensors as in classical differential geometry. The inclusion Vectb (M ) ,→ Vect(M ) induces a natural vector bundle map
αb : b T M −→ T M .
The structures introduced so far can be summarized by saying that (b T M, αb )
is a boundary tangential Lie algebroid. The b-tangent bundle is isomorphic to the
tangent bundle in the interior of M , and (M, Vectb (M )) is an example of a manifold
with Lie structure at infinity [100].
Using a set of boundary defining functions {xi }i=1...k , the Lie algebra Vectb (M )
is locally spanned near a point x ∈ Hi of index 1 by {xi ∂xi , ∂h1 , . . . , ∂hn−1 }, where
{hl }n−1
l=1 is a local coordinate system for Hi . In a neighbourhood of x ∈ Hi ∩ Hj ,
i 6= j, we can form a basis given by {xi ∂xi , xj ∂xj , ∂y1 , . . . , ∂yn−2 }, where {yl }n−2
l=1 is a
local coordinate system on Yij = Hi ∩ Hj . The dual basis for the b-cotangent bundle
 i dxj
b ∗
, xj , dy1 , . . . , dyd−2 .
T M is denoted by dx
xi
A b-metric g is now simply a metric on the vector bundle b T M over M . This
defines an ordinary metric in the interior of M . The general expression in local
coordinates near a corner point is
n−2
n−2
X X
X
dxi dxj
dxi
g=
aij
⊗
+2
bij
⊗ dyj +
cij dyi ⊗ dyj .
x
x
x
i
j
i
i,j=0,1
i=0,1 j=1
i,j=1

X

(3.48)

A b-metric g is exact if there exists a set of boundary defining functions xi such that
it takes the form

dxi dxi


near Hi ,
 x ⊗ x + hHi
i
i
g=
(3.49)
dxi dxi dxj
dxj



⊗
+
⊗
+ hHi ∩Hj near Hi ∩ Hj ,
xi
xi
xj
xj
where hY denotes a metric on Y .
A b-differential operator is an element of the universal enveloping algebra of
Vectb (M ), the collection of which act naturally on C ∞ (M ). A b-differential operator
59

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

D ∈ Diffbk (M, E1 , E2 ) of order k between two vector bundles E1 and E2 over M is
a smooth fibre-preserving map, which in any local trivialisations of E1 and E2 is
given by a matrix of linear combinations of products of up to k b-vector fields. Most
concepts from differential geometry such as connections, symbols and characteristic
classes can be generalized to the b-geometry setting.
Since exact b-metrics are singular at the boundary it is necessary to define a
renormalised
fact that the
R 1 b-integral. Heuristically, the problem stems from the
z
is
divergent.
The
cure
for
this
is
to
multiply
with
x
for
Re(z) > 0.
integral 0 dx
x
Lemma 3.50. ([61, Lemma 4.1]) Let M be a manifold with corners and an exact
b-metric g. Then for all f ∈ C ∞ (M ) and z ∈ C with Re(z) > 0, the integral
Z
F (f, z) :=
xz f dg
(3.51)
M

exists and extends to a meromorphic function F (f, z) of z ∈ C.
Definition 3.52. Let M be a manifold with corners and an exact b-metric g. The
b-integral of a function f ∈ C ∞ (M ) is
Z
b
f dg = Regz=0 F (f, z) .
(3.53)
M

This allows us to define the b-trace of a pseudo-differential operator D in terms
of its kernel D(x, y) as
Z

b
b
tr D(x, x) dg(x) ,
(3.54)
Tr(D) =
M

where the trace tr is over the fibres of the vector bundle on which D acts.
We conclude by describing the relation between h2i-manifolds with exact bmetrics and h2i-manifolds equipped with F -background fields. To a manifold M
equipped with a Riemannian metric we attach infinite cylindrical ends Hi × (−∞, 0]
to the boundary hypersurfaces and Yij × (−∞, 0]2 to the corners. The coordinate
transformation xi = e ti for ti ∈ (−∞, 0] maps this non-compact manifold to the
interior of a manifold X with corners. The product metric on the cylindrical ends
i
i
⊗ dx
. For this reason one can view the
induces a b-metric on X, since dti ⊗ dti = dx
xi
xi
study of manifolds with exact b-metrics as the study of manifolds with cylindrical
ends. For regular 2-morphisms in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 it is again natural to attach the collars
using the F -diffeomorphisms which are part of the regular 2-morphism.

3.3.2

Loya-Melrose index theorem for manifolds with corners

We have seen in Section 3.2 that it is helpful to attach mapping cylinders to a
manifold encoding the data of the identification of the boundary components with
60

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

[0, ∞) × Σ02

(−∞, 0] × [0, ∞) × S−

Σ
. 2

(−∞, 0]2 × C(S− )

M

Σ1
(−∞, 0] × Σ01

(−∞, 0]2 × S−

Figure 3.2: Illustration of the construction of M̂ 0 near Σ− .
lower-dimensional objects. In the extended case we also need mapping boxes at the
corners. Let Yi , i = 1, 2, 3, 4 be four
 closed manifolds equipped with F -fields of
2
product form fi ∈ F (−1 , 1 ) × Yi , and a diagram of F -diffeomorphisms ϕij :
Y1

ϕ12

ϕ13

Y3

Y2
(3.55)

ϕ24
ϕ34

Y4

Then the mapping box M(Y, ϕ) of length  corresponding to this data is constructed

2
 




2
by gluing 0, 34  × Y1 , 14 ,  × 0, 43  × Y2 , 0, 34  × 14 ,  × Y3 and 14 ,  × Y4
along ϕij . Using descent we can construct an element f ∈ F M(Y, ϕ) .
Given a regular 2-morphism M from Σ1 : S− −→ S+ to Σ2 : S− −→ S+ in
∼
∼
CobF
n,n−1,n−2 , by definition M comes with collars N− = [0, 1 ) × Σ1 and N+ =
(−1 , 0] × Σ+ . We first attach mapping cylinders of a fixed length  ∈ R>0 to Σ1 , Σ2
and the 0-boundary. In a second step we attach mapping boxes of length  to the
corners of M . We denote this new manifold by M 0 (see Figure 3.2). For this to be
well-defined we need compatibility of all collars involved.
has
 The
 new1manifold
 four
1
0
0
distinct boundaries
which we denote
 
 by Σ1 , Σ2 , C S− = −  − 2 1 ,  + 2 1 × S−0
1
1
and C S+ = −  − 2 1 ,  + 2 1 × S+ . We can now attach cylindrical ends to M .
For this, we first define
M̂ 0◦ = M 0 t∂M 0 (−∞, 0] × Σ01 t [0, ∞) × Σ02
(3.56)


t (−∞, 0] × C(S− ) t [0, ∞) × C(S+ ) ,
where we use the collars to glue the manifolds and extend all fields as products.
Then M̂ 0◦ is a non-compact manifold with corners. Further gluing (see Figure 3.2)
61

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

produces
M̂ 0 = M̂ 0◦ t∂ M̂ 0◦

(−∞, 0]2 × S− t (−∞, 0] × [0, ∞) × S−
(3.57)
2

t [0, ∞) × S+ t (−∞, 0] × [0, ∞) × S+



with all structures extended as products. As in the case of manifolds with boundaries,
/ M̂ 0 is not Fredholm in general, and one can prove analogously
the Dirac operator D
/
that DM̂ 0 is Fredholm if and only if the induced Dirac operators on the corners and
boundaries are invertible [60].
When the kernel of the corner Dirac operator is non-trivial, we have to add again
a mass perturbation [61]. The induced twisted spinor bundle over Y = S+ t −S−
decomposes into spinors of positive and negative chirality. We pick a unitary self/ Yi ) −→ ker(D
/ Yi ), for every connected component Yi
adjoint isomorphism Ti : ker(D
of the corner Y , which is odd with respect to the Z2 -grading of the spinor bundle;
/ Y is 0 by assumption. We define
this is possible since the index of D
T± =

n
M

T±,i

and

T = T− ⊕ T+ ,

(3.58)

i=1



/ S±,i −→ ker D
/ S±,i . Now the operator D
/ Y − T is invertible on
where T±,i : ker D
0
Y . This suggests extending T to an operator T̂ on M̂ such that the massive Dirac
/ M̂ 0 − T̂ is Fredholm on weighted Sobolev spaces. A concrete construction
operator D
of T̂ can be found in [60, Section 2.3]5 , from which it is clear that T̂ is independent
of the length  of the attached mapping cylinders and boxes up to a choice which is
involved in the construction and does not change the index theory. When we choose
for every boundary component a small mass αi as in Section 3.1, then


G+
G−
+
α·s 1
/+
D
H ŜM̂
−→ e α·s L2 ŜM̂
(3.59)
0
0
M̂ 0 − T̂ : e
is a Fredholm operator on weighted Sobolev spaces [60, Theorem 2.6]. We restrict
ourselves to a description of the corresponding index theorem on manifolds which
are of the form M 0 for a regular 2-morphism M in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 ; the more general
version can be found in [60, Theorem 6.13].
To define the η-invariant on a manifold Σ with boundary we proceed as in Section 3.1 and define Σ̂ by attaching cylindrical ends to Σ. In general, the Dirac
/ Σ̂ has a continuous spectrum, so we have to use the expression (3.28) to
operator D
define the η-invariant as an integral
Z ∞



2
1
b
/ Σ̂ e −t D/ Σ̂ dt ,
/ Σ̂ = √
t−1/2 b Tr D
(3.60)
η D
π 0
5

T̂ corresponds to −S constructed in [60, Section 2.3], where we choose the same operators for
the two remaining corners. Furthermore, the construction depends on an ordering of the faces,
which we chose such that 0-boundary is smaller than the 1-boundary.

62

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

where we have to replace the usual trace by the b-geometric trace (see Section 3.3.1)
because its argument is not a trace-class operator on Σ̂ in general. There are other
ways of defining η-invariants for manifolds with boundaries using appropriate boundary conditions [65, 101, 102]. The b η-invariant agrees with the canonical boundary
conditions on spinors induced by scattering Lagrangian subspaces, which we describe
in Remark 3.68.
There is a further contribution to the index theorem coming from the corners.
We define for Σ0i , i = 1, 2 the scattering Lagrangian subspace
n
ΛCi =
lim Ψ(y− , s− ) ⊕ lim Ψ(y+ , s+ )
s− →−∞

s+ →∞

(3.61)
/ Σ̂0 bounded
Ψ ∈ C ∞ ŜΣ̂0 ∩ ker D

G



i

i

o

/Y
⊆ ker D




/ Y is a
where s− ∈ (−∞, 0], s+ ∈ [0, ∞)
 and y± ∈ S± . The set ΛCi ⊂ ker D
/ ∂Σi with respect to the symplectic form ω( · , · ) =
Lagrangian subspace of ker D
( i Γ · , · )L2 [102], where Γ is the chirality operator on the spinor bundle over the
/ Y , called
corners. We define an odd unitary self-adjoint isomorphism Ci of ker D
/ Σ̂0 , by setting Ci = id on ΛCi and Ci = − id on Λ⊥
the scattering matrix of D
Ci . We
 i
/ Y the +1-eigenspace of T . Following [65, 103], we introduce
denote by ΛT ⊂ ker D
the ‘exterior angle’ between Lagrangian subspaces by the spectral formula
X
1
µ(ΛT , ΛCi ) = −
θ,
(3.62)
π iθ
− +
e

∈spec(−T Ci )
−π<θ<π

where the grading is with respect to the Z2 -grading of the twisted spinor bundle over
the corners.
With this notation, we can now formulate the index theorem for manifolds of the
form M 0 as:
Theorem 3.63. Let M be a regular 2-morphism from Σ1 : S− −→ S+ to Σ2 : S− −→
S+ in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 . Then
Z



1 b
+
+
/ Σ̂0 + b η D
/ Σ̂0
/ M̂ 0 − T̂ =
− η D
ind D
KAS −
1
2
2
M0


/ Σ̂0 − dim ker D
/ Σ̂0
+ dim ker D
1
2

+ dim(ΛT ∩ ΛC1 ) − dim(ΛT ∩ ΛC2 ) + µ(ΛT , ΛC1 ) + µ(ΛT , ΛC2 ) .
(3.64)
Remark 3.65. The extra corner contributions in the last line of (3.64) to the
usual (b-geometric) Atiyah-Patodi-Singer formula (3.30) can be understood as follows. Let Σ be a regular 1-morphism in the bicategory CobF
n,n−1,n−2 . Then for every
63

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly


/ ∂Σ ) as above we can relate the spectral data of the massive Dirac
T ∈ EndC ker(D
operator on Σ̂ to their massless counterparts as


b
/ Σ̂ − T̂ = b η D
/ Σ̂ + µ(ΛT , ΛC ) ,
η D
(3.66)


/ Σ̂ − T̂ = dim ker D
/ Σ̂ + dim(ΛT ∩ ΛC ) ,
dim ker D

(3.67)

where ΛC is the scattering Lagrangian subspace for Σ.
Remark 3.68. We describe the relation between b η-invariants and η-invariants with
boundary conditions [64]. We denote by Π+ the projection onto the space spanned by
/ Σ , and by ΠT the projection onto the positive eigenspace
the positive eigenspinors of D
/ T , which coincides with D
/ ∂Σ , on the
ΛT . This allows us to define a Dirac operator D
domain


Ψ ∈ H 1 ŜΣ̂
(Π+ + ΠT )Ψ ∂Σ = 0 .
(3.69)
/ T is self-adjoint and elliptic for all T . It is shown in [64, Theorem 1.2]
The operator D
that

/ T ) = bη D
/ Σ̂ + µ(ΛT , ΛC ) ,
η(D
(3.70)
so that we can combine the b η-invariant and the exterior angle µ in (3.64) into an
η-invariant for a Dirac operator with suitable boundary conditions induced by the
Lagrangian subspace ΛT .
Proof of Theorem 3.63. From the general index theorem for manifolds with corners
[60, Theorem 6.13] we get
+

/ M̂ 0 − T̂ +
ind D



Z





1 b
/ Ĉ(S+ )
/ Ĉ(S− ) + b η D
/ −Σ̂0 + b η D
/ Σ̂0 + b η D
η D
KAS −
=
1
2
2
M0


/ Σ̂0 + dim(ΛT ∩ ΛC1 ) − dim ker D
/ Σ̂0 − dim(ΛT ∩ ΛC2 )
+ dim ker D
1
2


/ Ĉ(S− ) + dim(Λ i Γ T− ∩ ΛC− ) − dim ker D
/ Ĉ(S+ ) − dim(Λ i Γ T+ ∩ ΛC+ )
+ dim ker D
+ µ(ΛT , ΛC1 ) + µ(ΛT , ΛC2 ) + µ(Λ i Γ T+ , ΛC+ ) + µ(Λ i Γ T− , ΛC− )


(3.71)

where ΛC± are the scattering Lagrangian subspaces for C(S± ), respectively. We
can calculate the contributions from the boundaries C(S± ) explicitly and show that
they all vanish: Attaching infinite cylindrical ends to C(S± ) leads to the manifolds
64

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

(−∞, ∞) × S± . The Dirac operator on the manifold (−∞, ∞) × S± of odd dimension
n − 1 is given by (3.23):

/ S± ×(−∞,∞) = σt D
/ S± + ∂t ,
(3.72)
D
where t ∈ (−∞, ∞). We are interested in the dimension of the space of harmonic
spinors Ψ(y± , t). By elliptic regularity there exists a basis of smooth sections. Multiplying (3.72) with σt−1 , we get

/ S± + ∂t Ψ(y± , t) = 0 .
(3.73)
D
Using separation of variables Ψ(y± , t) = ψ(y± ) α(t), this equation reduces to a pair
of equations
dα(t)
= −λ α(t) ,
(3.74)
dt
/ S± is an elliptic operator. The
for an arbitrary constant λ which must be real since D
second equation has solution (up to a constant) α(t) = e −λ t , and we finally see that
there are no non-zero square-integrable spinors Ψ(y
 ± , t) with eigenvalue 0. Hence,
/
the contributions from the terms dim ker DĈ(S± ) are 0.
A solution of (3.74) is bounded if and only if λ = 0, and so the scattering
Lagrangian subspace takes the form
 



/ S± ) = ψ ⊕ ψ ψ ∈ ker D
/ S± ⊂ ker D
/ S± ⊕ ker D
/ −S± .
ΛC± = ∆ ker(D
(3.75)
/ S± ψ(y± ) = λ ψ(y± )
D

and

This implies that
dim(Λ i Γ T± ∩ ΛC± ) = 0 ,

(3.76)

since the chirality operator Γ on the outgoing and ingoing boundaries differs by a
sign while T± is the same over both boundaries.

/ Ĉ(S± ) + µ(Λ i Γ T± , ΛC± ) is the η-invariant on a
Finally, by Remark 3.68, b η D
cylinder with identical boundary conditions at both ends, which vanishes by [65,
Theorem 2.1].
For later use, we derive here a formula for the index of a 2-morphism under
cutting. For this, we first have to study the behaviour of the various quantities in
the index formula (3.64) under orientation-reversal.
Lemma 3.77. Let Σ be a regular 1-morphism in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 with fixed boundary

/
condition T ∈ EndC ker(D∂Σ ) as above. If we reverse the orientation of Σ, then T
/ ∂(−Σ) and
still defines a suitable boundary condition of D




b
/ Σ̂ = dim ker D
/ −Σ̂
/ Σ̂ = −b η D
/ −Σ̂ ,
dim ker D
and
η D
(3.78)
dim(ΛT ∩ ΛC ) = dim(ΛT ∩ Λ−C )

and

µ(ΛT , ΛC ) = −µ(ΛT , Λ−C ) ,

(3.79)

where Λ−C is the scattering Lagrangian subspace for −Σ and in the last equation µ
is computed on Y and −Y , respectively.
65

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

/ Σ̂ = −D
/ −Σ̂ of operators acting on sections of the
Proof. There is an equality D
G
underlying twisted spinor bundle ŜΣ̂ , which implies the first two equations. The
Lagrangian subspaces ΛC and ΛT are independent of the orientation, which implies
the third equation.
We can interpret the exterior angle µ(ΛT , ΛC ) as the η-invariant of a cylinder
with boundary conditions induced by ΛT and ΛC [65]. Reversing the orientation of
this cylinder corresponds to µ(ΛT , Λ−C ). The last equation then follows from the
fact that the η-invariant changes sign under orientation-reversal.
Proposition 3.80. The index is additive under vertical composition of regular 2morphisms in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 if we choose identical boundary conditions on the corners.
Proof. The contributions from the gluing boundary cancel each other by Lemma
3.77. We still have to show that
Z
Z
Z
KAS =
KAS +
KAS .
(3.81)
(M2 ◦M1 )0

M10

M20

This is not completely obvious since the vertical composition also involves deleting
half of the collars of theR gluing boundary. However, from (3.64) and the construction
of M̂ 0 it is clear that M 0 KAS is independent of the length of the collars. Using
the description of gluing in terms of mapping cylinders we can cover (M2 ◦ M1 )0 by
M̃10 and M̃20 , where M̃i0 is the manifold Mi0 with 43 of the collar corresponding to the
gluing boundary removed.

3.4

The extended index field theory and Hamiltonian description of the parity anomaly

We shall now proceed to extend the quantum field theory Aζparity to an anomaly
quantum field theory Aζparity : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC describing the parity anomaly
in n − 1 dimensions. In contrast to [51] we will use coends instead of limits for
the construction of the field theory, because this makes the relation to the theories
constructed in Section 4.1 clearer. This is nothing more than a matter of taste. It
would have been equally possible to rewrite Chapter 4 in terms of limits. Some of the
constructions might seem odd due to the fact that there are no boundary conditions
to chose on n − 1 dimensional manifolds. For the convenience of the reader we review
the definition and some basic properties of coends following [104, 105].
Definition 3.82. Let F : Copp × C −→ D be a functor. A wedge for F consists of an
object d ∈ D together with a family of morphisms {αc : d −→ F (c, c)}c∈C such that

66

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

for all morphisms f : c −→ c0 in C
αc0

d

F (c0 , c0 )

αc

(3.83)

F (f,id0c )

F (c, c) F (id ,f ) F (c, c0 )
c

commutes. A morphism between wedges f : d −→ d0 consists of a morphism d −→ d0
in D such that
d
αc0

d0

α0c0

F (c0 , c0 )

(3.84)

αc
α0c

F (f,id0c )

F (c, c) F (id ,f ) F (c, c0 )
c

commutes.
There is a dual notion of a cowedge consisting of an object d together with
morphisms αc : F (c, c) −→ d such that the obvious diagram commutes. Morphisms
of cowedges are defined as morphisms d −→ d0 such that the obvious diagrams
commute. (Co)Ends are universal (co)wedges.
opp
RDefinition 3.85. Let F : C × C −→ D be a functor. An end of F written as
F (c, c) is a terminal object in the category of wedges of F .
c∈C
R c∈C
An coend of F written as
F (c, c) is an initial object in the category of
cowedges of F .
R c∈C
Remark 3.86. Let us spell out the universal property of the coend
F (c, c).
R c∈C
Being a cowedge it comes with morphisms F (c, c) −→
F (c, c) for all c ∈ C
such that for every other cowedge F (c, c) −→ d there exists a unique morphism
R c∈C
F (c, c) −→ d making

F (c, c0 )

F (c, c)

F (c0 , c0 )

R c∈C

(3.87)

F (c, c)

d
67

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

commute. This shows that coends are unique up to unique isomorphism. For this
reason we will speak of the coend sometimes. The universal property also ensures that
coends are functorial, i.e. (assuming that all coends in D exist) there is a functor
Z c∈C

: [Copp × C, D] −→ D .

(3.88)

Example 3.89.
• Let F : C −→ D be a functor between categories. F induces a
prC
F
opp
b
functor F : C × C −−→
C −→ D. In Chapter
4 we will drop the b . Spelling
R
out the definitions shows that the end c∈C Fb(c, c) agrees with the limit of F
R c∈C
and the coend
Fb(c, c) with the colimit.
• Let C be a category equivalent to the category with one object and one morphism
and F : Copp × C −→ D. The (co)end is given by the value of F (c, c) at an
arbitrary element c ∈ C with structure maps induced from F .
• Let F : V −→ V 0 be a linear functor between 2-vector spaces. The value of F
at an object V ∈ V can be computed by the coend
F (V ) ∼
=

Z V 0 ∈V

Hom(V 0 , V ) ⊗ F (V 0 ) .

(3.90)

Furthermore, this is natural in V inducing a natural isomorphism
F (·) ∼
=

Z V 0 ∈V

Hom(V 0 , ·) ⊗ F (V 0 ) .

(3.91)

Statements of this type are called generalized Yoneda lemmas. The special case
F = idV is sometimes called the (enriched) coYoneda lemma. We refer to [106,
Section 2.3] for a proof in the more general context of finite tensor categories.
(Co)ends can be expressed as (co)limits ensuring there existence in a lot of interesting examples.
Proposition 3.92. Let D be a complete and cocomplete category and F : Copp ×C −→
D a functor. The end of F exists and is given by the equalizer
!
Z
Y
Y
F (c, c) ∼
F (c, c) ⇒
F (c, c0 )
.
(3.93)
= eq
c∈C

f : c→c0

c∈C

Dually, the coend of F exists and is given by the coequalizer
Z c∈C

!
F (c, c) ∼
= coeq

a
f : c→c0

F (c, c0 ) ⇒

a

F (c, c)

.

(3.94)

c∈C

One of the advantages of the calculus of (co)ends is that iterated (co)ends are
well behaved, as indicated by the integral notation.
68

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

Theorem 3.95 (Fubini’s theorem for (co)ends). Let F : C × Copp × E × Eopp −→ D
be a functor. There are canonical natural isomorphisms
Z c∈C Z e∈E
Z (c,e)∈C×E
Z e∈E Z c∈C
F (c, c, e, e) ∼
F (c, c, e, e) ∼
F (c, c, e, e) . (3.96)
=
=
The same statement holds for ends.
After this short detour we come back to the index field theory. Following Sec+
+
tion 3.2, we would like to define something like Aζparity (M ) = ζ ind(D/ M̂ 0 −T̂ ) for a fixed
this
ζ ∈ C× and every regular 2-morphism M of CobF
n,n−1,n−2 . The problem with

/ Y ) . The
definition is that the index may depend on our choice of T ∈ EndC ker(D
resolution is to include the data about the choice of T into our extended quantum
field theory.
We do this by combining, for each object S of CobF
n,n−1,n−2 , all possible boundary
ζ
conditions T into a category Aparity (S) in the following way: Let T(S) be the category

/ S ) , which is local
with one object for every odd self-adjoint unitary T ∈ EndC ker(D
in the sense that T is the direct sum over the connected components
Si of S of odd

/ Si . There is exactly one
self-adjoint unitary operators acting on the kernel ker D
morphism Iij : Ti −→ Tj between every pair of objects in T. The category Aζparity (S)
is then defined to be the finite completion of the C-linearisation of the category T(S).
We will frequently use the following concrete model for Aζparity (S):
L
• Objects of Aζparity (S) are formal finite linear combinations Ti ∈T(S) Vi ∗Ti , with
Vi ∈ VectC . We will sometimes write Ti for C ∗ Ti .
• The space of morphism from C∗Ti to C∗Tj is the one dimensional vector space
C[Iij ] generated by the morphism Iij . In order to obtain the morphism spaces
between all objects in Aζparity (S), this definition has to be extended bilinearly,
i.e.
!
n
m
M
M
M
HomAζ (S)
Vi ∗ Ti ,
Vj ∗ Tj =
Hom(Vi , Vj ) ⊗ C[Iij ] (3.97)
parity

i=1

j=1

i,j

for all formal finite sums. We can see a morphism in Aζparity (S) as a matrix of
morphisms between the the individual parts of the finite formal sums. Composition is defined by matrix multiplication and composition in T(S).
The linear category Aζparity (S) carries a canonical VectC -module structure
VectC  Aζparity (S) −→ Aζparity (S)
V 

n
M

Vi ∗ Ti 7−→

i=1

n
M

(3.98)
(V ⊗C Vi ) ∗ Ti .

i=1

We can construct a C-linear functor Aζparity (Σ) : Aζparity (S− ) −→ Aζparity (S+ ) for
a regular 1-morphism Σ : S− −→ S+ in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 by using the corresponding
69

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

boundary and corner contributions to the index formula (3.64). For elements T± of
T(S± ), we define
b

IΣ (T− , T+ ) = − 12

/ Σ̂0 ) − dim ker(D
/ Σ̂0 )
η(D
(3.99)


− dim(ΛT− ⊕T+ ∩ ΛC ) + µ(ΛT− ⊕T+ , ΛC ) .
We will sometimes drop the subscript Σ when it is clear from the context. With
this convention the index theorem for manifolds with corners Equation (3.64) can be
rewritten as
Z
+
+
\
/ M̂ 0 − T− ⊕ T+ ) =
ind(D
KAS + IΣ2 (T− , T+ ) − IΣ1 (T− , T+ ) .
(3.100)
M0

To construct Aζparity on Σ we define the functor
Σ(·, ·) : T(S+ )opp × T(S− ) −→ VectC
T+ × T− 7−→ C

.

(3.101)

I+ij × I−ij : T+j × T−i −→ T+i × T−j 7−→ idC ·ζ IΣ (T−j ,T+i )−IΣ (T−i ,T+j )
We fix a generator T− of Aζparity (S− ) and define
Z T+ ∈T(S+ )
ζ
Σ(T+ , T− ) ∗ T+ .
Aparity (Σ)[T− ] :=

(3.102)

This assignment extends linearly to a functor Aζparity (Σ) : Aζparity (S− ) −→ Aζparity (S+ ).
To define Aζparity on regular 2-morphisms we use the following proposition:
Proposition 3.103. Let M : Σ1 =⇒ Σ2 be a regular 2-morphism. The collection of
linear maps
+

\ +

ξ(M )T− ,T+ = ζ ind(D/ M̂ 0 −T− ⊕T+ ) · idC : C −→ C .

(3.104)

defines a natural transformation ξ(M ) : Σ1 (·, ·) =⇒ Σ2 (·, ·).
Proof. Naturality of ξ(M ) means that the diagram
ζ

C
I

ζ Σ1

0 ,T )−I
0
(T−
+
Σ1 (T− ,T+ ) ·id

\
/ + −T−
ind(D
⊕T+ + )
M̂ 0
·idC

C
I

ζ Σ2

C

ζ

C

0 +
/ + −T 0\
ind(D
− ⊕T+ ) ·id
M̂ 0
C

0 ,T )−I
0
(T−
+
Σ2 (T− ,T+ ) ·id

(3.105)
C

C

has to commute. This follows immediately from the index theorem for manifolds
with corners rewritten as in Equation (3.100).
70

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

The natural transformation ξ(M ) induces by Remark 3.86 a natural transformation Aζparity (M ) : Aζparity (Σ1 ) =⇒ Aζparity (Σ2 ).
We define the theory Aζparity on limit 1-morphisms as the functor corresponding
to a mapping cylinder. From the definition of Aζparity (Σ) it is clear that this is
independent of the length of the mapping cylinder since only the behaviour at infinity
is important. On limit 2-morphisms we define the theory to be the value of Aζparity
on a mapping cylinder of length . This completes the definition of Aζparity .
Before demonstrating that Aζparity is an extended quantum field theory, we explicitly calculate the functors corresponding to limit 1-morphisms.
Proposition 3.106. Let φ : S− −→ S+ be a limit 1-morphism in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 with
mapping cylinder M(φ), and let T± be fixed objects in T(S± ). Then

(3.107)
IM(φ) (T− , T+ ) = − 21 dim(ΛT− ∩ Λφ∗ T+ ) + µ(ΛT− , Λφ∗ T+ ) .
Proof. By Remark 3.68 we get a term in IM(φ) (T− , T+ ) corresponding to the ηinvariant with boundary conditions induced by the Lagrangian subspaces ΛT± . There
is a diffeomorphism induced by φ−1 and id from the mapping cylinder of φ with length
1 to the cylinder [0, 1] × Σ− . The boundary conditions change to new boundary conditions induced by ΛT− and Λφ∗ T+ . The η-invariant for this situation was calculated
in [65, Theorem 2.1], from which we get
/ T− ,φ∗ T+ ) = µ(ΛT− , Λφ∗ T+ ) .
η(D

(3.108)

We can extend the diffeomorphism induced by φ−1 and id above to manifolds with
cylindrical ends attached. The expression (3.107) then follows from similar arguments
to those used in the proof of Theorem 3.63.
Theorem 3.109. Aζparity : CobF
n,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC is an invertible extended quantum field theory.
Proof. We construct a family of natural isomorphisms ΦS : id =⇒ Aζparity (idS ) for all
objects S ∈ CobF
n,n−1,n−2 .
For this, it is enough to construct a natural isomorphism Φ0S : Hom(·, ·) =⇒ [0, 1]×
S(·, ·) by the enriched coYoneda lemma from Example 3.89
Z T+ ∈T(S)
idAζ (S) (T− ) ∼
Hom(T+ , T− ) ∗ T+ .
(3.110)
=
parity

Sending Iij ∈ Hom(Ti , Tj ) to the complex number ζ I[0,1]×S (Ti ,Tj ) induces such an isomorphism.
The naturality follows immediately from the commuting diagram
Hom(Ti , Tj )

ζ I(Ti ,Tj )

C

Iij 7→Ii0 j 0

ζ

Hom(Ti0 , Tj 0 )
ζ

I(Ti0 ,Tj 0 )

71

C

I(Ti0 ,Tj 0 )−I(Ti ,Tj )

(3.111)

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

Let Σ1 : S− −→ S and Σ1 : S −→ S+ be two 1-morphisms in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 . For the
composition we have to construct natural C-linear isomorphisms



ΦΣ1 ,Σ2 : Aζparity Σ2 ◦ Aζparity Σ1 =⇒ Aζparity Σ2 ◦ Σ1 .
(3.112)
Using the definition of Aζparity on 1-morphisms we get
"Z

#

T ∈T(S)

Aζparity (Σ2 ) ◦ Aζparity (Σ1 )[T− ] = Aζparity (Σ2 )

∼
=

∼
=

Z T ∈T(S)

Σ1 (T, T− ) ∗ T
Z T+ ∈T(S+ )

Σ1 (T, T− ) ⊗

Σ2 (T+ , T ) ∗ T+

Z T+ ∈T(S+ ) Z T ∈T(S)

!
Σ2 (T+ , T ) ⊗ Σ1 (T, T− )

∗ T+
(3.113)

where we used the linearity of the coend, the symmetric monoidal structure of VectC
and Fubini’s theorem 3.95 for coends.
On the other side we get
Z T+ ∈T(S+ )
ζ
(Σ2 ◦ Σ1 )(T+ , T− ) ∗ T+ .
(3.114)
Aparity (Σ2 ◦ Σ1 )[T− ] =
The natural isomorphism ΦΣ1 ,Σ2 is induced by the family of isomorphisms
Σ2 (T+ , T ) ⊗ Σ1 (T, T− ) −→ (Σ2 ◦ Σ1 )(T+ , T− )
(3.115)
1 ⊗ 1 7−→ ζ IΣ2 ◦Σ1 (T− ,T+ )−IΣ1 (T− ,T )−IΣ2 (T,T+ )
To show that this construction is natural, it is enough to observe that the diagram
ζ I(T− ,T+ )−I(T− ,T )−I(T,T+ )

C
ζ

C

0 ,T 0 )+I(T 0 ,T 0 )−I(T ,T )−I(T,T )
I(T−
−
+
+

ζ

C
ζ

0 ,T 0 )−I(T 0 ,T 0 )−I(T 0 ,T 0 )
I(T−
+
−
+

0 ,T 0 )−I(T ,T )
I(T−
− +
+

(3.116)

C

commutes. This completes the construction of the natural isomorphism Φ.
In order for Φ to equip Aζparity with the structure of a 2-functor, we need to check
naturality with respect to 2-morphisms and associativity. We start with the compatibility with 2-morphisms. For this fix regular 2-morphisms M1 : Σ− −→ Σ+ and
M2 : Σ0− −→ Σ0+ between regular 1-morphisms Σ− , Σ+ : S− −→ S and Σ0− , Σ0+ : S −→
72

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

S+ . By the naturality of all our constructions it is enough to check this for fixed
corner conditions T− ∈ T(S− ), T ∈ T(S) and T+ ∈ T(S+ ). Using the index theorem,
this follows from the calculation

logζ ξ M2 • M1 T− ,T+
Z
=
(M2 •M1 )0

KAS + IΣ0+ ◦Σ+ (T− , T+ ) − IΣ0− ◦Σ− (T− , T+ )

Z

Z
KAS +

=
M10

M20

KAS + IΣ0+ ◦Σ+ (T− , T+ ) − IΣ0− ◦Σ− (T− , T+ )



+ IΣ+ (T− , T ) + IΣ0+ (T, T+ ) − IΣ+ (T− , T ) + IΣ0+ (T, T+ )


+ IΣ− (T− , T ) + IΣ0− (T, T+ ) − IΣ− (T− , T ) + IΣ0− (T, T+ )

(3.117)



= logζ ξ M1 T− ,T1 + logζ ξ M2 T1 ,T+

+ IΣ0+ ◦Σ (T− , T+ ) − IΣ+ (T− , T ) − IΣ0+ (T, T+ )
− IΣ0− ◦Σ− (T− , T+ ) − IΣ− (T− , T ) − IΣ+ (T, T+ )





= logζ ξ M1 T− ,T1 + logζ ξ M2 T1 ,T+


+ logζ ΦΣ+ ,Σ0+ T− ,T+ + logζ Φ−1
.
0
Σ− ,Σ
T− ,T+
−

It remains to demonstrate compatibility with associativity: Φ ◦ (Φ • id) = Φ ◦ (id •Φ),
i.e. the coherence condition (A.7). For this, we fix three composable regular 1morphisms Σi , i = 1, 2, 3 from Si− to Si+ in CobF
n,n−1,n−2 . By the naturality of
all constructions, it is enough to check the relation for fixed objects T− of T(S1− ),
T1 of T(S2− ) = T(S1+ ), T2 of T(S3− ) = T(S2+ ), and T+ of T(S3+ ). This follows

73

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

immediately from the commutative diagram
C

ζ I(T− ,T2 )−I(T− ,T1 )−I(T1 ,T2 )

ζ I(T1 ,T+ )−I(T2 ,T1 )−I(T2 ,T+ )

ζ I(T− ,T+ )−I(T2 ,T1 )−I(T2 ,T+ )−I(T− ,T1 )

C

ζ I(T− ,T+ )−I(T− ,T2 )−I(T2 ,T+ )

(3.118)

C

ζ I(T− ,T+ )−I(T− ,T1 )−I(T1 ,T+ )

C
We finally have to check the coherence condition (A.8). We fix a regular 1-morphism
Σ : S− −→ S+ . We evaluate the resulting natural transformation at a fixed object
T− of T(S− ). By naturality we can check the equation for the terms appearing in
the coend. For this we fix an object T+ of T(S+ ). Then the composition gives
T+

ζ Iid (T+ ,T+ )

I

T+

ζ M1 (id)◦Σ

(T− ,T+ )−IΣ (T− ,T+ )−Iid (T+ ,T+ )


T+ = T+

id


T+ ,

(3.119)
where we used IM1 (id)◦Σ (T− , T+ ) − IΣ (T− , T+ ) = 0. This proves the condition (A.8).
The coherence condition for Aζparity (id) ◦ Aζparity (Σ) can be proven in the same way.
Next we come to the vertical composition of regular 2-morphisms. It is enough
to show that the composition is given by multiplication for fixed objects T± of
Aζparity (S± ). This follows immediately from Proposition 3.80 by an argument similar
to the one used in the proof of Theorem 3.36. The conditions for limit 1-morphisms
and limit 2-morphisms follow now from their representations as mapping cylinders.
Now we check compatibility with the monoidal structure. There are canonical
C-linear equivalences of categories given on objects by
ζ
ζ
ζ
0
0
χ−1
S,S 0 : Aparity (S t S ) −→ Aparity (S)  Aparity (S )

(3.120)

sending (T, T 0 ) ∈ T(S) × T(S 0 ) ∼
= T(S t S 0 ) to T  T 0 , and
ι−1 : Aζparity (∅) −→ VectC

(3.121)


/ ∅ ) to C. All further structures required for Aζparity
sending 0 ∈ {0} = EndC ker(D
to be a symmetric monoidal 2-functor are trivial. It is straightforward if tedious to
check that all diagrams in the definition of a symmetric monoidal 2-functor commute,
74

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

but we shall not write them out explicitly. Finally, it is straightforward to see
that Aζparity factors through the Picard 2-groupoid Pic2 (2VectC ), and hence Aζparity is
invertible.
Remark 3.122. The proof of Theorem 3.109 is more or less independent of the
concrete form of IΣ (T− , T+ ) and the index theorem. It only uses additivity under
vertical composition and the decomposition
Z

+
+
\
/
KAS + I∂+ M (T− , T+ ) − I∂− M (T− , T+ ) ,
(3.123)
ind DM̂ 0 − T− ⊕ T+ =
M0

into a local part and a global part depending solely on boundary conditions. Hence,
it should be possible to apply this or a similar construction to a large class of invariants depending on boundary conditions. Indeed, we apply the same construction in
Section 4.1 to build an extended functorial field theory from the parallel transport on
higher flat gerbes. This construction will be topological in nature.
A different example of particular interest would involve η-invariants on odddimensional manifolds with corners, which should be related to chiral anomalies in
even dimensions and extend Dai-Freed theories [101]. For steps towards constructing
such a field theory using different methods see [37, 107].
Field theories with parity anomaly and projective representations
A quantum field theory with parity anomaly is now regarded as a theory relative to
Aζparity as described in Chapter 2, i.e. a natural symmetric monoidal 2-transformation
Z ζ : 1 =⇒ trAζparity . The concrete description of the extended quantum field theory
Aζparity given in the proof of Theorem 3.109 allows us to calculate the corresponding groupoid 2-cocycle along the lines discussed in Section 2.2.2; this information
about the parity anomaly is contained in the isomorphism (3.112). We choose a
C-linear equivalence of categories χ : Aζparity (S) −→ VectC sending all objects T of
T(S) to C and all morphisms f of T(S) to idC ; a weak inverse is given by picking
a particular object TS in T(S) and mapping V ∈ VectC to V ∗ TS . The functor Aζparity (φ) corresponding to a limit 1-morphism φ : S1 −→ S2 in the symmetry
groupoid Sym(CobF
n,n−1,n−2 ) is given by the coend
Z T+ ∈T(S)
ζ
Aparity (φ)(T− ) =
M(φ)(T+ , T− ) ∗ T+
(3.124)
where M(φ) is the mapping cylinder of φ. A choice of an object TS of T(S) defines an
isomorphism ϕS : TS −→ Aζparity (φ)(TS ), which for simplicity we pick to be the same
boundary mass perturbation as chosen for the weak inverse above. The groupoid
cocycle evaluated at φ1 : S1 −→ S2 and φ2 : S2 −→ S3 corresponding to this choice
is then given by
Aζ

IM(φ2 ◦φ1 ) (TS1 ,TS3 )−IM(φ1 ) (TS1 ,TS2 )−IM(φ2 ) (TS2 ,TS3 )
αφ1parity
.
,φ2 = ζ

75

(3.125)

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

We can evaluate this expression explicitly by using (3.107) to get


1
Aζ
logζ αφ1parity
=
−
dim ΛTS1 ∩ Λφ∗1 φ∗2 TS3 + µ ΛTS1 , Λφ∗1 φ∗2 TS3
,φ2
2


− dim ΛTS1 ∩ Λφ∗1 TS2 − µ ΛTS1 , Λφ∗1 TS2


− dim ΛTS2 ∩ Λφ∗2 TS3 − µ ΛTS2 , Λφ∗2 TS3
.

(3.126)

To calculate the part of the 2-cocycle involving identity 1-morphisms we can use
(3.119) to get
Aζ

Aζ

1

parity
αφ,id
= αidparity
= ζ −I[0,1]×S (TS ,TS ) = ζ − 4 dim ker(D/ S ) ,
S
S ,φ

(3.127)

where the last equality follows from (3.107). From a physical point of view, it is
natural to assume this to be equal to 1 since the identity limit morphism should still
be a non-anomalous symmetry of every quantum field theory. We can achieve this by
normalising our anomaly quantum field theory Aζparity to the theory Ãζparity obtained
by redefining

/ S− ) + dim ker(D
/ S+ ) .
(3.128)
I˜Σ (T− , T+ ) = IΣ (T− , T+ ) + 81 dim ker(D
The proof of Theorem 3.109 then carries through verbatum with IΣ replaced by I˜Σ
everywhere.
Example 3.129. We conclude by illustrating how to extend the partition function
(−1)
discussed in Section 3.2 to the anomaly quantum field theory Aparity , glossing over
many technical details. To construct the second quantized Fock space of a quantum
field theory of fermions coupled to a background gauge field on a Riemannian manifold
S, one needs a polarization
H = H+ ⊕ H−

(3.130)

of the one-particle Hilbert space H of wavefunctions, which we take to be the sections
/ S has no zero modes, then
of the twisted spinor bundle SSG . If the Dirac Hamiltonian D
+
there exists a canonical polarization given by taking H = H >0 (resp. H − = H <0 )
to be the space spanned by the positive (resp. negative) energy eigenspinors. Given
such a polarization we can define
V
V
(−1)
Zparity (S) = H + ⊗ (H − )∗ ,
(3.131)
V
where H denotes the exterior algebra generated by the vector space H. Now timereversal (or orientation-reversal) symmetry acts by interchanging H + and H − , and
(−1)
there is no problem extending this symmetry to the Fock space Zparity (M ).
/ S ) is non-trivial, as is the case for fermionic gapped quanIn the case that ker(D
tum phases of matter, one could try to declare all zero modes to belong to H >0 or
76

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

H <0 and use the corresponding polarization to define a Fock space. We cannot apply
this method of quantization, since it breaks orientation-reversal symmetry. Therefore, we are forced to use a different polarization compatible with orientation-reversal
symmetry. There is no canonical choice for such a polarization, but rather a natural
/ S ):
family parameterized by Lagrangian subspaces ΛT ⊂ ker(D
H + (ΛT ) = H >0 ⊕ ΛT

H − (ΛT ) = H <0 ⊕ ΓΛT .

and

(3.132)

Since orientation reversion acts proportionally to the chirality operator Γ on spinors,
these polarizations are compatible with the symmetry. We then get a family of Fock
spaces
V
V
V
V <0 ∗
(−1)
⊗ F (S, T ) , (3.133)
Zparity (S, T ) = H + (ΛT ) ⊗ H − (ΛT )∗ = H >0 ⊗
H
where the essential part for our discussion is encoded in the finite-dimensional vector
space
V
V
F (S, T ) = ΛT ⊗ (ΓΛT )∗ .
(3.134)
These vector spaces define an element
Z T ∈T(S)
F (S) :=
F (S, T ) ∗ T

(3.135)

(−1)

of Aparity (S), or equivalently a C-linear functor
(−1)

(−1)

Zparity (S) : VectC −→ Aparity (S) .

(3.136)

To define the functor appearing in the coend on morphisms we fix an ordered basis
for every ΛT and assign to a morphism T1 −→ T2 the linear map induced by sending
the fixed basis of ΛT1 to the basis of ΛT2 .
We sketch how to extend this to a natural symmetric monoidal 2-transformation,
(−1)
realising an anomalous quantum field theory Zparity with parity anomaly according to
Definition 2.67. For a 1-morphism Σ : S− −→ S+ we have to construct a natural
transformation
(−1)

(−1)

(−1)

(−1)

Zparity (Σ) : Aparity (Σ) ◦ Zparity (S− ) =⇒ Zparity (S+ ) .

(3.137)

The left-hand side is given by the coend
Z T+ ∈T(S+ ) Z T− ∈T(S− )
(Σ(T+ , T− ) ⊗ F (S, T− )) ∗ T+ .

(3.138)

This implies that a natural transformation can be defined from a family of compatible
(−1)
linear maps Zparity (Σ)T− ,T+ : (Σ(T+ , T− ) ⊗ F (S, T− )) −→ F (S+ , T+ ). These should
again be given by an appropriate regularization of path integrals, i.e. the determinant
77

Chapter 3: The parity anomaly

of the Dirac operator with appropriate boundary conditions. As before we assume
that these maps are well-defined up to a sign. To fix the sign, we have to consistently
fix reference background fields on all 1-morphisms. This is possible, for example,
by using a connection on the universal bundle and pullbacks along classifying maps.
Again we can fix the sign at these reference fields to be positive. Using a spectral flow
similar to (3.43) with boundary conditions T− and T+ , we can fix the sign for all
other field configurations. Assuming that this spectral flow can be calculated by the
index with appropriate boundary conditions, we see that these sign ambiguities satisfy
(−1)
the coherence conditions encoded by Aparity , i.e. they define a natural symmetric
monoidal 2-transformation. This demonstrates in which sense a field theory with
(−1)
parity anomaly takes values in Aparity .

78

Chapter 4
’t Hooft anomalies of discrete
gauge theories
This final chapter is concerned with the study of anomalies of Dijkgraaf-Witten theories. These are gauge theories with discrete gauge group. They provide a mathematically tractable toy modle for the topological aspects of quantum gauge theories, but
also have applications in the description of symmetry protected topological phases
of matter [23–25, 108–113]. We start in Section 4.1 by defining Dijkgraaf-Witten
theories as extended functorial field theories by orbifolding an invertible field theory
constructed from higher flat gerbes. In Section 4.2 we study symmetries of discrete
gauge theories and their ’t Hooft anomalies. In Section 4.3 we realize gauged versions
of Dijkgraaf-Witten theories with ’t Hooft anomaly as boundary states of higher dimensional invertible field theories. For this we develop a pushforward construction
for relative field theories generalizing previous work by Schweigert and Woike [72]
from ordinary to relative field theories.

4.1

Parallel transport of higher flat gerbes as an
invertible homotopy quantum field theory

In this section we define classical and quantum Dijkgraaf-Witten theories [70] as
extended functorial field theories. The non-extended case goes back to the work of
Freed and Quinn [71]. The once extended case has been constructed in 3-dimensions
by Morton [114]; see also [115] for a discussion of the fully extended 3-dimensional
version.
We construct the classical Dijkgraaf-Witten theory as a special example of a more
general construction. Let T be a manifold. For a line bundle with connection over
T we can compute the holonomy along closed loops in T , describing the coupling
of a point particle to an electromagnetic background gauge field. For higher dimensional sigma models appearing for example in string theory one requires gauge fields
which can be coupled to higher dimensional world volumes. Their global geome79

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

try is described by gerbes. For an n-gerbe we can compute its holonomy over an
n + 1-dimensional world volume.
Gerbes are higher categorical generalizations of line bundles. They are classified
by the Deligne hypercohomology group H n+1 (T ; D(n + 1)) [116], i.e. the hypercohomology of the complex D(n + 1)
d log

d

d

d

U (1)T −−−−→ Ω1 (T ) −→ Ω2 (T ) −→ . . . −→ Ωn+2 (T )

(4.1)

of sheaves on T , where U (1)T is the sheaf of smooth U (1)-valued functions. The
curvature of an n-gerbe is a n + 2-form on T and a gerbe is called flat if its curvature
vanishes. Flat n-gerbes on T are classified by the ordinary (singular) cohomology
group H n+1 (T ; U (1)), see for example [117, Section 3.1]. For θ ∈ H n+1 (T ; U (1))
we can compute the holonomy of the gerbe corresponding to θ for an embedded
n + 1-dimensional compact oriented worldvolume ι : M −→ T by
Z
ι∗ θ = hι∗ θ, σM i,
(4.2)
M

where we denote by σM ∈ Hn+1 (M ) the fundamental class1 of M and by
h−, −i : H ∗ (M ; U (1)) ⊗ H∗ (M ) −→ U (1)

(4.3)

the evaluation of cochains on chains. Hence, flat gerbes and their parallel transport
can be described purely using algebraic topology. For this reason, when working with
flat gerbes, we can replace the manifold T by an arbitrary topological space. In this
section we construct for every n-cocycle θ in singular cohomologoy an invertible extended functorial field theory describing the parallel transport for the corresponding
flat gerbe.
Classical Dijkgraaf-Witten theory is obtained by setting T = BG for a finite group
G. We construct the corresponding quantum theory using the extended orbifold construction of Schweigert and Woike [73] and comment on its relation to representation
theory.

4.1.1

Simplifications of the cobordism bicategory

The background fields F relevant for classical Dijkgraaf-Witten theories are principal
bundles with finite structure group G and orientations. These background fields are
topological in nature and hence lead to huge simplifications in the description of
the bicategory CobF
n,n−1,n−2 introduced in Section 2.1.2. Furthermore, the simplified
version does not suffer from the shortcomings mentioned in Remark 2.54. In this
section we define this simplified bicategory denoted by G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 . A convenient
1

Recall that the choice of an orientation for a connected orientable compact n-dimensional
manifold M is equivalent to the choice of a generator σM of Hn (M ) ∼
= Z. The generator σM is
called the fundamental class of M .

80

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

way to describe principal G-bundles are classifying maps to BG. The construction for
the bordism category works with arbitrary target space T . We work in this generality
as long as it does not cause any technical problems. Functorial field theories based on
bordism categories of this type are called homotopy quantum field theories in [118].
The domain of definition for an extended homotopy quantum field theory with
target space T is the symmetric monoidal bordism bicategory T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 of T bordisms.
Definition 4.4. For n ≥ 2 and any non-empty topological space T , which we will
refer to as the target space, we define the bicategory T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 as follows:
(0) Objects are pairs (S, ξ) consisting of an n − 2-dimensional oriented closed manifold S and a continuous map ξ : S −→ T .
(1) A 1-morphism (Σ, ϕ) : (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ (S1 , ξ1 ) is an oriented compact collared
bordism (Σ, χ− , χ+ ) : S0 −→ S1 (by this we mean a compact oriented n − 1dimensional manifold Σ with boundary equipped with orientation preserving
diffeomorphisms χ− : [0, 1) × S0 −→ Σ− and χ+ : (−1, 0] × S1 −→ Σ+ with
Σ− ∪ Σ+ being a collar of ∂Σ), and a map ϕ : Σ −→ T making the diagram
Σ
χ−

χ+

{0} × S0

ϕ

ξ0 ◦prS0

T

{0} × S1

(4.5)

ξ1 ◦prS1

commute. No compatibility on the collars is assumed. We define composition
of 1-morphisms by gluing of bordisms along collars and maps. The collars
are needed to define a smooth structure on the composition. The identities
are cylinders equipped with the trivial homotopy, where trivial means constant
along the cylinder axis.
(2) A 2-morphism (Σ, ϕ) =⇒ (Σ0 , ϕ0 ) between 1-morphisms (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ (S1 , ξ1 ) is
defined to be an equivalence class of pairs (M, ψ) consisting of an n-dimensional
collared compact oriented bordism M : Σ −→ Σ0 with corners and a map
ψ : M −→ T (see Figure 4.1). Concretely, this consists of a compact oriented
h2i-manifold M equipped with
• a decomposition of the 0-boundary ∂0 M = ∂0 M− ∪ ∂0 M+ and orientation
preserving diffeomorphisms δ− : [0, 1)×Σ −→ M− and δ+ : (−1, 0]×Σ0 −→
M+ to collars of this decomposition,
• a decomposition of the 1-boundary ∂1 M = ∂1 M− ∪ ∂1 M+ and orientation
preserving diffeomorphisms α− : [0, 1] × [0, 1) × S0 −→ M−0 and α+ :
[0, 1] × (−1, 0] × S1 −→ M+0 to collars of this decomposition making for

81

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

T

ϕb
Σb

ψ

[0, 1] × ξ0
[0, 1] × ξ1

M

ϕa

Σa
Figure 4.1: Sketch of a 2-morphism.
some ε > 0 the diagrams
α−

[0, ε) × [0, 1) × S0

α+

M

[0, ε) × (−1, 0] × S1
, (4.6)

δ−

id ×χ−

id ×χ+

[0, ε) × Σ
(−ε, 0] × Σ0
id −1×χ0−

id −1×χ0+

δ+
α−

(1 − ε, 1] × [0, 1) × S0

M

α+

(1 − ε, 1] × (−1, 0] × S1
(4.7)

and
M
α+ tδ+

α− tδ−

[0, 1] × S0 t Σ

ψ

ξ0 ◦prS0 tϕ

T
82

[0, 1] × S1 t Σ0
ξ1 ◦prS1 tϕ0

(4.8)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

commute. Again no compatibility on the collars is assumed.
e to be equivalent if we can find an
f, ψ)
We define two pairs (M, ψ) and (M
f such that the diagram
orientation-preserving diffeomorphism Φ : M −→ M
M
δ+

δ−

[0, ) × Σ

Φ

δe−

(−, 0] × Σ0

(4.9)

δe+

f
M
and a similar diagram involving the collars of the 1-boundary commute for
small enough  > 0 and if moreover there exists a homotopy relative boundary
from ψ : M −→ T to ψe ◦ Φ : M −→ T .
In order to define the vertical composition of 2-morphisms we fix a diffeomorphism
[0, 2] −→ [0, 1] which is equal to the identity on a neighborhood of 0 and given by
x 7−→ x − 1 in a neighborhood of 2. Now we define the vertical composition by gluing
using the collars of 0-boundaries. We use our fixed diffeomorphism to rescale both
the ingoing and outgoing 1-collars.
We define horizontal composition of 2-morphisms by gluing manifolds and maps
along 1-boundaries, where the new 0-collars arise from the old ones by restriction
to [0, ε) in a way (4.6) and (4.7) allow us to glue them along the boundary and
then rescale the interval. By disjoint union the structure of a symmetric monoidal
bicategory with duals on T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 is obtained.
Remark 4.10. In contrast to the bicategory constructed in Section 2.1.2 the bicategory T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 does not contain limit morphisms. The reason for this is that
homotopies between maps to T can be implemented by putting the homotopies on
cylinders. Furthermore, orientation preserving diffeomorphisms can be implemented
via the mapping cylinder construction. In general, one has to replace the symmetry
groupoid introduced in Section 2 by the 2-groupoid consisting of morphisms of this
type since homotopies do not compose strictly. In the case of T = BG it is possible
to still work with a groupoid as we explain in Section 4.1.3. In the present context
the truncation tr T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 should as well be understood as the restriction to
2-morphisms of this type. This excludes certain invertible cobordisms not of the form
[0, 1] × Σ, which can appear in high dimensions, see e.g. [53, Warning 2.2.8].
Definition 4.11. An extended homotopy quantum field theory is a symmetric
monoidal 2-functor
T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC .

(4.12)

We denote the endomorphism category of ∅ in T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 by T -Cobn . A
homotopy quantum field theory is a symmetric monoidal functor T -Cobn −→ VectC .
Via restriction every extended homotopy quantum field theory induces a homotopy
quantum field theory.
83

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

4.1.2

The field theory

To a flat n − 1-gerbe on a topological space T represented by a singular cocycle
θ ∈ Z n (T ; U (1)) we associate an extended homotopy quantum field theory
Tθ : T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC

(4.13)

which can be understood as the parallel transport operator of θ. The evaluation of Tθ
on an n-dimensional closed oriented manifold M together with a map ψ : M −→ T
yields an element in U (1), namely the holonomy of θ with respect to ψ. This section is
concerned with the concrete construction of the field theory Tθ , using similar methods
to Section 3.4. Our construction has been generalized to non-oriented extended
homotopy quantum field theories in [119].

Definition on objects
Let (S, ξ) be an object of T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 , i.e. a closed oriented n − 2-dimensional
manifold S equipped with a continuous map ξ : S −→ T . Denote by Fund(S) the
groupoid of fundamental cycles of S. Its objects are fundamental cycles of S, i.e.
those elements of Zn−2 (S) representing the fundamental class of S in Hn−2 (S). A
morphism σ −→ σ 0 between two fundamental cycles is an n − 1-chain τ such that
∂τ = σ 0 − σ. Composition is given by addition of n − 1-chains.
The extended homotopy quantum field theory Tθ assigns to (S, ξ) a 2-vector
Ln space
Tθ (S, ξ) defined as follows. The objects in Tθ (S, ξ) are formal finite sums i=1 Vi ∗σi ,
where the Vi are finite-dimensional complex vector spaces and the σi are objects in
Fund(S). We write σ for C ∗ σ. The space of morphisms between σ, σ 0 ∈ Fund(S)
seen as objects of Tθ (S, ξ) is given by
HomTθ (S,ξ) (σ, σ 0 ) :=

C[HomFund(S) (σ, σ 0 )]
,
∼

(4.14)

where C[HomFund(S) (σ, σ 0 )] is the free complex vector space on the set HomFund(S) (σ, σ 0 ),
and for two morphisms τ, τe : σ −→ σ 0 we make the identification
τe ∼ hξ ∗ θ, λiτ ,

(4.15)

whenever τe − τ = ∂λ for some λ ∈ Cn (S). Note that in (4.15) the choice of λ does
not matter. In order to obtain the morphism spaces between all objects in Tθ (S, ξ),
(4.14) has to be extended bilinearly, i.e.
!
n
m
M
M
M
HomTθ (S,ξ)
Vi ∗ σi ,
Vj ∗ σj =
Hom(Vi , Vj ) ⊗ HomTθ (S,ξ) (σi , σj ) (4.16)
i=1

j=1

i,j

L

n
i=1 σi ,

Lm



for all formal finite sums. The elements of HomTθ (S,ξ)
can be
j=1 σj
interpreted as matrices with equivalence classes of morphisms in HomTθ (S,ξ) (σ, σ 0 ) as
entries. Composition is defined by matrix multiplication and composition in Fund(S).
84

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

The VectC -module structure is given by
∗ : VectC × Tθ (S, ξ) −→ Tθ (S, ξ)
V ×

n
M

!
Vi ∗ σi

7−→

i=1

n
M
(V ⊗ Vi ) ∗ σi

(4.17)

!
.

i=1

This completes the definition of the 2-vector space Tθ (S, ξ). Since all the objects σi
are isomorphic, Tθ (S, ξ) has one simple object up to isomorphism, i.e. it is a 2-line.

Definition on 1-morphisms
Let (Σ, ϕ) : (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ (S1 , ξ1 ) be a 1-morphism in T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 . Again, we denote
by Fund(Σ) the groupoid of fundamental cycles of Σ, i.e. the groupoid of relative
cycles in Cn−1 (Σ) representing the fundamental class of Σ in Hn−1 (Σ, ∂Σ). For
fundamental cycles σ0 and σ1 of S0 and S1 , respectively, we denote by Fundσσ10 (Σ) the
subgroupoid of Fund(Σ) spanned by all fundamental cycles µ of Σ with ∂µ = σ1 − σ0 .
Here we suppress the inclusion of the ingoing and outgoing boundary into Σ in
the notation. By [120, VI., Lemma 9.1] the groupoid Fundσσ10 (Σ) is non-empty and
connected.
In order to define the 2-linear map Tθ (Σ, ϕ) : Tθ (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ Tθ (S1 , ξ1 ) we define
on the free vector space C[Fundσσ10 (Σ)] the equivalence relation
µ0 ∼ hϕ∗ θ, νiµ

(4.18)

for any ν ∈ Cn (Σ) such that ∂ν = µ − µ0 . We use the notation
C[Fundσσ10 (Σ)]
Σ (σ1 , σ0 ) :=
∼
ϕ

(4.19)

for the quotient and observe that Σϕ (−, −) extends to a functor Fundopp (S1 ) ×
Fund(S0 ) −→ VectC , which is defined on a morphism λ : σ1 −→ σ2 in Fund(S1 ) by
Σϕ (−, σ) (λ) : Σϕ (σ2 , σ) −→ Σϕ (σ1 , σ)
(4.20)
µ 7−→ µ − λ
and on a morphism λ : σ1 −→ σ2 in Fund(S0 ) by
Σϕ (σ, −) (λ) : Σϕ (σ, σ1 ) −→ Σϕ (σ, σ2 )
(4.21)
µ 7−→ µ − λ
A straightforward calculation shows that this is well-defined.

85

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Now Tθ (Σ, ϕ) : Tθ (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ Tθ (S1 , ξ1 ) is defined on objects by the coend
Z σ1 ∈Fund(S1 )
Tθ (Σ, ϕ)σ0 :=

Σϕ (σ1 , σ0 ) ∗ σ1

(4.22)

and linear extension. Here, the coend can be replaced by an end, since it is taken
over a groupoid and limits and colimits over essentially finite groupoids taken in a
2-vector space coincide.

Definition on 2-morphisms
Let (M, ψ) : (Σa , ϕa ) =⇒ (Σb , ϕb ) be a 2-morphism between 1-morphisms (Σa , ϕa )
and (Σb , ϕb ) from (S0 , ξ0 ) to (S1 , ξ1 ) in T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 . We assign to (M, ψ) the 2morphism Tθ (Σa , ϕa ) =⇒ Tθ (Σb , ϕb ) between the 1-morphisms Tθ (Σa , ϕa ), Tθ (Σb , ϕb ) :
Tθ (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ Tθ (S1 , ξ1 ) consisting of the natural maps
Tθ (Σa , ϕa )σ0 −→ Tθ (Σb , ϕb )σ0

(4.23)

for σ0 ∈ Fund(S0 ) which are the maps between the respective coends induced by the
natural transformation
Tθ (M )σ1 ,σ0 : Σϕa a (σ1 , σ0 ) −→ Σϕb b (σ1 , σ0 )

(4.24)

defined as follows: For µa ∈ Fundσσ10 (Σa ) we can find a fundamental cycle ν of M with
∂ν = µb − µa + ([0, 1] × σ0 − [0, 1] × σ1 )

(4.25)

for some fundamental cycle µb ∈ Fundσσ10 (Σb ). Mapping µa to hψ ∗ θ, νi[µb ] yields a welldefined linear map C[Fundσσ10 (Σa )] −→ Σϕb b (σ1 , σ0 ), which descends to Σϕa a (σ1 , σ0 ) and
gives us the needed map (4.24).

Proof that Tθ is an extended homotopy quantum field theory
To complete the definition of Tθ we still have to specified the necessary coherence
isomorphisms. We will do this in the proof of the following theorem
Theorem 4.26. For any topological space T and any cocycle θ ∈ Z n (T ; U (1)),
Tθ : T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC

(4.27)

is an invertible homotopy quantum field theory with target T .
The proof of Theorem 4.26 will be split into different parts which will occupy
a large part of the remainder of this section. We start by proving a useful Gluing
Lemma for h2i-manifolds:

86

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Lemma 4.28 (Gluing Lemma for h2i-manifolds). Consider two n-dimensional h2imanifolds M1 and M2 with representatives for the fundamental class ν1 and ν2
such that ∂νi = µi,0 + µi,1 for i = 1, 2, where µi,0 and µi,1 are representatives for
the fundamental class of the 0 and 1 boundary, respectively (note that this implies
∂µi,0 = −∂µi,1 ). Now assume we have an orientation reversing diffeomorphism from
a connected component Σ of, say, the 1 boundary of M1 onto the 1 boundary of M2
compatible with the fundamental cycles picked above, i.e. µ0,1 |Σ = −µ1,1 |Σ . Then
ν1 + ν2 is a representative of the fundamental class of the manifold obtained by gluing
M1 and M2 (see Figure 4.2) along Σ.

M1
Σ

M2

U
Figure 4.2: Sketch of the manifolds involved in lemma 2.8.
Proof. We denote the composition of M1 and M2 by M . Obviously, ν1 + ν2 is a cycle
relative ∂M . We have to show that it represents the fundamental class of M . To
this end, we use the long exact sequence
· · · → Hn (∂M ∪ Σ, ∂M ) → Hn (M, ∂M ) → Hn (M, ∂M ∪ Σ) → Hn−1 (∂M ∪ Σ, ∂M ) → . . .
(4.29)

in homology associated to the triple ∂M ⊂ ∂M ∪ Σ ⊂ M and compute the relevant
terms occurring in it by means of a collar U ∼
= (−1, 1) × Σ in M (see Figure 4.2 for
a pictorial presentation):
• For the computation of H∗ (∂M ∪ Σ, ∂M ) we define V := ∂M ∩ U and find by
excision of the complement W := ∂M \ V of V in ∂M
H∗ (∂M ∪ Σ, ∂M ) ∼
= H∗ ((∂M ∪ Σ) \ W, ∂M \ W ).

(4.30)

Since the inclusion (Σ, ∂Σ) −→ ((∂M ∪ Σ) \ W, ∂M \ W ) is a homotopy equivalence, we arrive at
H∗ (∂M ∪ Σ, ∂M ) ∼
= H∗ (Σ, ∂Σ).

(4.31)

• For the computation of H∗ (M, ∂M ∪ Σ) we use that the inclusion (M, ∂M ∪
Σ) −→ (M, ∂M ∪ U ) is a homotopy equivalence. After excising Σ in (M, ∂M ∪
U ) we find
H∗ (M, ∂M ∪ Σ) ∼
= H∗ (M0 \ Σ, ∂M0 ∪ U− ) ⊕ H∗ (M1 \ Σ, ∂M1 ∪ U+ ), (4.32)
87

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

where U− and U+ is the image of (−1, 0) × Σ and (0, 1) × Σ in U , respectively.
Since the inclusion (M0 \ Σ, ∂M0 ∪ U− ) −→ (M0 , ∂M0 ∪ U− ∪ Σ) induces an
isomorphism in homology and since Σ −→ U− ∪ Σ is a homotopy equivalence,
we obtain H∗ (M0 \ Σ, ∂M0 ∪ U− ) ∼
= H∗ (M0 , ∂M0 ) and analogously H∗ (M1 \
Σ, ∂M1 ∪ U+ ) ∼
= H∗ (M1 , ∂M1 ). Thus, we are left with
H∗ (M, ∂M ∪ Σ) ∼
= H∗ (M0 , ∂M0 ) ⊕ H∗ (M1 , ∂M1 ).

(4.33)

Using (4.31) and (4.33) we obtain from (4.29) the exact sequence
0 −→ Hn (M, ∂M ) −→ Hn (M0 , ∂M0 ) ⊕ Hn (M1 , ∂M1 ) −→ Hn−1 (Σ, ∂Σ) ,

(4.34)

where the morphism Hn (M0 , ∂M0 ) ⊕ Hn (M1 , ∂M1 ) −→ Hn−1 (Σ, ∂Σ) takes [ν1 ] ⊕
[ν2 ] to [∂ν1 + ∂ν2 ]. Evaluating the kernel of this morphism yields an isomorphism
Hn (M, ∂M ) ∼
= Z([ν1 ] ⊕ [ν2 ]). This shows that ν0 + ν1 is a generator of Hn (M, ∂M ),
i.e. an orientation of M . This orientation agrees with the orientation of M in a
neighborhood of an arbitrary point away from the gluing boundary, hence they agree.
As a corollary we get the following:
Corollary 4.35 (Gluing Lemma for manifolds with boundary). Let Σa : S0 −→
S1 and Σb : S1 −→ S2 be n − 1-dimensional cobordism, and let ν ∈ Cn−1 (Σa ) and
ν 0 ∈ Cn−1 (Σb ) be fundamental cycles with ∂ν = σ1 − σ0 and ∂ν 0 = σ2 − σ1 for fixed
fundamental cycles σj ∈ Zn−2 (Sj ), j = 0, 1, 2. Then by ν 0 ◦ν := ν 0 +ν ∈ Cn−1 (Σb ◦Σa )
we get a fundamental cycle of Σb ◦ Σa satisfying ∂(ν 0 ◦ ν) = σ2 − σ0 .
Using Corollary 4.35 we show that Tθ respects the composition of 1-morphisms
up to coherent natural isomorphism. This is a crucial part of the 2-functoriality of
Tθ .
Lemma 4.36. Tθ respects the composition of 1-morphisms up to coherent natural
isomorphism.
Proof. The coherence isomorphisms consist of natural isomorphisms (see Definition A.4)
Φ(S,ξ) : idTθ (S,ξ) =⇒ Tθ (idS,ξ )

(4.37)

for all objects (S, ξ) ∈ T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 and
Φ(Σa ,ϕa ),(Σb ,ϕb ) : Tθ (Σb , ϕb ) ◦ Tθ (Σa , ϕa ) =⇒ Tθ ((Σb , ϕb ) ◦ (Σa , ϕa ))

(4.38)

for all composable 1-morphisms
(Σa , ϕa ) : (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ (S1 , ξ1 ) and (Σb , ϕb ) : (S1 , ξ1 ) −→ (S2 , ξ2 )
in T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 .
88

(4.39)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Using the enriched co-Yoneda lemma from Example 3.89 we can write the identity
as the coend
Z σ∈Tθ (S,ξ)
idTθ (S,ξ) (−) ∼
HomTθ (S,ξ) (σ, −) ∗ σ.
(4.40)
=
Without loss of generality, we can evaluate this at a generator σ0 ∈ Fund(S1 )
σ0 ∼
=

Z σ∈Tθ (S,ξ)

HomTθ (S,ξ) (σ, σ0 ) ∗ σ ∼
=

Z σ∈Fund(S)
HomTθ (S,ξ) (σ, σ0 ) ∗ σ.

(4.41)

On the other hand, we have
Z σ∈Fund(S)
Tθ (idS,ξ )(σ0 ) =

([0, 1] × S)[0,1]×ξ (σ, σ0 ) ∗ σ .

(4.42)

There is a natural isomorphism
([0, 1] × S)[0,1]×ξ (σ, σ0 ) −→ HomTθ (S,ξ) (σ, σ0 )
(4.43)
µ 7−→ −pS ∗ µ
using the projection pS : [0, 1] × S −→ S. It induces an isomorphism between the
coends in (4.41) and (4.42) and gives us the desired isomorphism (4.37).
To specify the natural isomorphism (4.38) for 1-morphisms (Σa , ϕa ) : (S0 , ξ0 ) −→
(S1 , ξ1 ) and (Σb , ϕb ) : (S1 , ξ1 ) −→ (S2 , ξ2 ) in T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 , we note that for a
generator σ0 ∈ Fund(S0 )
Z (σ1 ,σ2 )∈Fund(S1 )×Fund(S2 )
(Tθ (Σb , ϕb )◦Tθ (Σa , ϕa ))σ0 =

∼
=

Z σ2 ∈Fund(S2 )

Z σ1 ∈Fund(S1 )

Σϕa a (σ1 , σ0 ) ⊗ Σϕb b (σ2 , σ1 ) ∗ σ2
!

Σϕa a (σ1 , σ0 ) ⊗ Σϕb b (σ2 , σ1 )

∗ σ2 ,
(4.44)

where we have used Fubini’s Theorem for coends (Theorem 3.95).
To compute the inner coend in (4.44), we observe that
Φσ1 ,σ2 : Σϕa a (σ0 , σ1 ) ⊗ Σϕb b (σ1 , σ2 ) −→ (Σb ◦ Σa )ϕb ∪ϕa (σ2 , σ0 )
(4.45)
µ1 ⊗ µ2 7−→ µ1 + µ2 .
is a canonical isomorphism by Lemma 4.35. Here ϕb ∪ ϕa : Σb ◦ Σa −→ T is the map

89

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

obtained from gluing ϕa and ϕb . We now obtain
Z σ1 ∈Fund(S1 )
Z σ1 ∈Fund(S1 )
ϕb
ϕa
∼
Σa (σ1 , σ0 ) ⊗ Σb (σ2 , σ1 ) =
(Σb ◦ Σa )ϕb ∪ϕa (σ2 , σ0 )
∼
=

Z σ1 ∈Fund(S1 )

(Σb ◦ Σa )ϕb ∪ϕa (σ2 , σ0 ) ⊗ C

∼
= (Σb ◦ Σa )ϕb ∪ϕa (σ2 , σ0 ) ,
(4.46)
where in the last step we used that Fund(S1 ) is connected. Insertion into (4.44) yields
isomorphisms
(Tθ (Σb , ϕb ) ◦ Tθ (Σa , ϕa ))σ0 ∼
= (Tθ ((Σb , ϕb ) ◦ (Σa , ϕa ))σ0 ,

(4.47)

which give us after linear extension the natural isomorphism (4.38).
In the next lemma we show that Tθ is well defined on the equivalence classes
corresponding to a 2-morphism in T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 :
Lemma 4.48. Tθ is well defined on 2-morphisms.
Proof. The non-trivial statement to show is the invariance under gauge transformation relative to the boundary. Consider 2-morphisms (M, ψ), (M, ψ 0 ) : (Σa , ϕa ) =⇒
h

(Σb , ϕb ) between 1-morphisms (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ (S1 , ξ1 ) with ψ ≃ ψ 0 relative ∂M . Let σ0
and σ1 be fundamental cycles of S0 and S1 , respectively. Now for µa ∈ Fundσσ10 (Σa )
and µb ∈ Fundσσ10 (Σb ) we can find a fundamental cycle ν of M adapted to µa and µb
as in equation (4.25). By definition of Tθ on 2-morphisms it suffices to show
∗

hψ ∗ θ, νi = hψ 0 θ, νi.

(4.49)

Indeed, if we see h as a map defined on [0, 1] × M , we find a chain homotopy between
the chain maps ψ∗ and ψ∗0 given by
0
ψ∗ p − ψ∗p
= ∂Hp + Hp−1 ∂

for all p ∈ Z,

(4.50)

where Hp := h∗p+1 Dp and
Dp : Sp (M ) −→ Sp+1 ([0, 1] × M ),

c 7−→ [0, 1] × c

(4.51)

is defined using the cross-product on singular chains, see [120, IV.16]. Hence,
∗

hψ ∗ θ, νi − hψ 0 θ, νi = hθ, Hn−1 ∂νi = hh∗ θ, [0, 1] × ∂νi.

(4.52)

The homotopy h being stationary on the boundary entails
h|[0,1]×∂M = ψ ◦ p∂M
90

(4.53)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

with the projection p∂M : ∂[0, 1] × M −→ ∂M . This yields
hh∗ θ, [0, 1] × ∂νi = hψ ∗ θ, p∂M ∗ ([0, 1] × ∂ν)i.

(4.54)

∂ (p∂M ∗ ([0, 1] × ∂ν)) = 0,

(4.55)

We have

where we use that the boundaries corresponding to the [0, 1] part cancel under the
projection, i.e.
pX ∗ (∂[0, 1] × X) = 0,

(4.56)

for any space X with projection pX : [0, 1] × X −→ X. This shows that p∂M ∗ ([0, 1] ×
∂ν) is a cycle. For dimensional reasons it must be a boundary as well. This shows
that (4.52) vanishes and finishes the proof.
Using the Gluing Lemma for h2i-manifolds 4.28 we prove that Tθ strictly preserves
the vertical composition of 2-morphisms:
Lemma 4.57. Tθ preserves the vertical composition of 2-morphisms strictly.
Proof. Given two 2-morphisms
(M, ψ) : (Σa , ϕa ) =⇒ (Σb , ϕb ) and (M 0 , ψ 0 ) : (Σb , ϕb ) =⇒ (Σc , ϕc )

(4.58)

between 1-morphisms (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ (S1 , ξ1 ) it suffices to show that for fundamental
cycles σ0 and σ1 of S0 and S1 , respectively, the composition of linear maps
Tθ (M 0 )σ ,σ

Tθ (M )σ ,σ

0
0
Σϕc c (σ1 , σ0 )
Σϕb b (σ1 , σ0 ) −−−−−−1−→
Σϕa a (σ1 , σ0 ) −−−−−1−→

(4.59)

as defined in (4.24) is equal to
Tθ (M 0 ◦M )σ ,σ

0
Σϕa a (σ1 , σ0 ) −−−−−−−−1−→
Σϕc c (σ1 , σ0 ).

(4.60)

Picking fundamental cycles ν and ν 0 for M and M 0 as in Lemma 4.28 this follows
from
∗

hψ ∗ θ, νi · hψ 0 θ, ν 0 i = h(ψ 0 ∪ ψ)∗ θ, ν + ν 0 i,

(4.61)

where ψ 0 ∪ ψ : M 0 ◦ M −→ T is the map obtained by gluing ψ and ψ 0 .
Now we can complete the proof of Theorem 4.26:
Proof of Theorem 4.26. Thanks to the Lemmata 4.36, 4.48 and 4.57 it remains to
prove the following:

91

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

• Horizontal composition: Let
(Σa , ϕa ) : (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ (S1 , ξ1 ), (Σb , ϕb ) : (S1 , ξ1 ) −→ (S2 , ξ2 )

(4.62)

be 1-morphisms and
(M, ψ) : (Σa , ϕa ) =⇒ (Σb , ϕb ), (M 0 , ψ 0 ) : (Σb , ϕc ) =⇒ (Σc , ϕc )

(4.63)

2-morphisms. We have to show that for fundamental cycles σ0 , σ1 and σ2 of
S0 , S1 and S2 , respectively, the square
Φ

Σϕa a (σ1 , σ0 ) ⊗ Σϕb b (σ2 , σ1 )

(Σb ◦ Σa )ϕb ∪ϕa (σ2 , σ1 )
Tθ (M 0 ◦M )σ2 ,σ0

Tθ (M )σ1 ,σ0 ⊗Tθ (M 0 )σ2 ,σ1
Φ

Σϕb b (σ1 , σ0 ) ⊗ Σϕc c (σ2 , σ1 )

(4.64)

(Σc ◦ Σb )ϕc ∪ϕb (σ2 , σ1 )

featuring as the horizontal arrows the isomorphisms from the proof of Lemma 4.36
commutes. This can be verified directly by picking representatives for the fundamental classes as in Lemma 4.28.
• Symmetric monoidal structure: there are natural equivalences of categories
ιθ : Tθ (∅) −→ VectC
(4.65)
σ∅ 7−→ C
and
χθ ((S0 , ξ0 ), (S1 , ξ1 )) : Tθ (S0 , ξ0 )  Tθ (S1 , ξ1 ) −→ Tθ (S0 t S1 , ξ0 t ξ1 )
(4.66)
σS0  σS1 7−→ σS0 + σS1 ,
where we suppress the inclusion into the disjoint union and denote by σ∅ the
unique fundamental cycle of the empty set (that it has by convention). The
modifications which are part of the structure of a symmetric monoidal 2-functor
(see Definition A.24) are trivial since the corresponding diagrams commute on
generators. The simple form of the coherence isomorphism makes it straightforward to check that the corresponding diagrams commute.
The field theory Tθ is obviously invertible.
The following assertion shows that up to natural equivalence Tθ only depends on
the cohomology class of θ.
Proposition 4.67. Let θ and θ0 be n-cocycles on a topological space T with values in
U (1) and Λ an n−1-chain on T satisfying d Λ = θ0 −θ. Then Λ induces a symmetric
monoidal natural equivalence
TΛ : Tθ −→ Tθ0 .
92

(4.68)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Proof. For all (S, ξ) ∈ T -Cobn,n−1,n−2 we define linear functors
TΛ (S, ξ) : Tθ (S, ξ) −→ Tθ0 (S, ξ)
σ 7−→ σ

(4.69)

[λ] 7−→ [hξ ∗ Λ, λi · λ] .
For a 1-morphism (Σ, ϕ) : (S0 , ξ0 ) −→ (S1 , ξ1 ) we get natural linear maps between
the vector spaces
Σϕθ (σ1 , σ0 ) −→ Σϕθ0 (σ1 , σ0 )
(4.70)
∗

[µ] 7−→ [hϕ Λ, µi · µ] ,
where we added the subscripts θ and θ0 to indicate the respective cocycles that enter
the definition of the vector spaces Σϕ (−, −). These maps induce maps between the
corresponding coends and combine into a natural transformations
TΛ (Σ, ϕ) : Tθ0 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ TΛ (S0 , ξ0 ) =⇒ TΛ (S1 , ξ1 ) ◦ Tθ (Σ, ϕ) .

(4.71)

A straightforward computation shows that this defines a natural transformation of 2functors. Furthermore, it is clear how to equip TΛ with the structure of a symmetric
monoidal transformation. Finally, we observe that TΛ is even a symmetric monoidal
equivalence, because T−Λ provides a weak inverse.
Remark 4.72. In the same way an n − 2-chain Ω satisfying d Ω = Λ0 − Λ induces
symmetric monoidal modifications between the natural transformations TΛ and TΛ0 .
We do not spell out the details here.
Remark 4.73. Restricting Tθ to the endomorphisms of the empty set induces a
non-extended homotopy quantum field theory
Tθ : T -Cobn −→ VectC ,

(4.74)

which admits the following concrete description
• To a closed n − 1 dimensional manifold Σ equipped with a map ϕ : Σ −→ T it
assigns the vector space Tθ (Σ, ϕ) = Σϕ (∅, ∅) = C[Fund(Σ)]/∼.
• To a morphism (M, ψ) : (Σa , ϕa ) −→ (Σb , ϕb ) it assigns the linear map
Tθ (M, ψ) : Tθ (Σa , ϕa ) −→ Tθ (Σb , ϕb )
(4.75)
∗

[σΣa ] 7−→ hψ θ, σM i[σΣb ] ,
with ∂σM = σΣb − σΣa .
This is the primitive homotopy quantum field theory constructed in [118, I.2.1].
93

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Remark 4.76. For trivial θ = 1 we get a canonical equivalence T0 −→ 1 defined on
objects by
T0 (S, ξ) 3

n
M

Vi ∗ σi 7−→

n
M

i=1

Vi ∈ VectC .

(4.77)

i=1

There is also a natural isomorphism in the other direction
Ω0 : 1 −→ T0
1(S, ξ) 3 C 7−→

lim
σ∈Fund(S)

σ ∈ T0 (S, ξ) .

(4.78)

We will use the natural transformation constructed here in Section 4.3.2.

4.1.3

Classical Dijkgraaf-Witten theory

Dijkgraaf-Witten theories [70] are gauge theories with finite gauge group. We fix
throughout this Section a finite group G. Every principal G-bundles carries a unique
flat connection. The stack of principal G bundles is equivalent to the stack [·, BG]
(see for example [72]) which sends a manifold Σ to the fundamental groupoid of the
mapping space Map(Σ, BG). The equivalence as stacks also includes the statement
that homotopy classes of homotopies between classifying maps can be identified with
gauge transformations. This is not true for arbitrary Lie groups as the following
simple example shows:2 the classifying space for U (1) is the Eilenberg-MacLane
space K(Z, 2). This implies Π1 (Map(?, BU (1))) ∼
= ?//?, but BunU (1) (?) ∼
= ?//U (1).
The possible actions of n-dimensional topological gauge theories with finite gauge
group G are classified by the n-th cohomology group of the classifying space BG with
coefficients in R/Z ∼
= U (1) [70]. The singular homology of the topological space can
be identified with the group cohomology [121] of G. We will switch freely between
these two perspectives. For a fixed representative θ0 ∈ Z n (BG; R/Z) of a cohomology
class, the action for a G-bundle with classifying map ψ : M −→ BG on an oriented
closed n-dimensional manifold M is given by
Z
Sθ0 (M, ψ) =
ψ ∗ θ0 .
(4.79)
M

As a real number, this action is only well-defined modulo Z by definition. The
quantity with physical relevance is the exponentiated action exp(2π i Sθ0 (M, ψ))
which takes values in U (1). For simplicity we work from now on with a cocycle
θ ∈ Z n (BG; U (1)) and interpret its integration over the manifold as the exponentiated action.
The corresponding classical field theory is a special case of the construction above
with T = BG. It is common to introduce a name for field theories with target BG:
2

This was pointed out to us by Lukas Woike.

94

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Definition 4.80. Let G be a finite group and n a positive integer. We denote by
G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 := BG-Cobn,n−1,n−2 the symmetric monoidal category of G-bordisms
(there is a slight abuse of notation because G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 could also describe bordisms
with maps to the discrete space G; however that would not be interesting). We call
an extended homotopy quantum field theory
Z : G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC

(4.81)

an extended G-equivariant topological quantum field theory.
Remark 4.82. In the non-extended case these appear as homotopy quantum field
theories with aspherical targets in [118]. Three-dimensional extended G-equivariant
topological field theories are discussed in [122] using the language of principal fiber
bundles and with an emphasis on theories of Dijkgraaf-Witten type. A definition of
extended G-equivariant topological field theories of arbitrary dimension and a detailed
investigation of the three-dimensional case including a relation to equivariant modular
categories is given in [73].
Definition 4.83. Let G be a finite group and θ ∈ Z n (BG; U (1)) an n-cocycle on G
with values U (1). The extended equivariant field theory BGθ is called the classical
Dijkgraaf-Witten theory with topological action θ and denoted by
Eθ : G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC .

(4.84)

As explained in Section 2.2.2 an invertible field theory induces (higher) line bundles over the groupoid of background field configurations. We now describe the
cocycles corresponding to these line bundles explicitly in terms of transgression.
Transgression
Let us briefly recall the concept of transgression, see e.g. [75]: Let M be an `dimensional closed oriented manifold with fundamental class σ. For a topological
space T and a class in H k (T ; U (1)) with k ≥ ` represented by a cocycle θ we can
define the class τM θ ∈ H k−` (T M ; U (1)) as being represented by the cocycle given by
(τM θ)(λ) := (ev∗ θ)(λ × σ)

(4.85)

for any k − `-simplex λ : ∆k−` −→ T M , where ev : T M × M −→ T is the evaluation
map. Here T M is the space of maps M −→ T equipped with the compact-open
topology. This gives rise to a map
τM : H k (T ; U (1)) −→ H k−` (T M ; U (1)),

(4.86)

the so-called transgression. If T is aspherical, then T M is equivalent to the groupoid
Π1 (M, T ) of maps from M −→ T with equivalence classes of homotopies as morphisms. In that case the transgression can be seen to take values in the group
cohomology group H k−` (Π1 (M, T ); U (1)).
95

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Invariants of closed oriented manifolds equipped with bundles and transgression
Evaluating the field theory Eθ on closed manifolds of dimension n, n − 1, and n − 2
provides algebraic invariants for manifolds equipped with maps into BG. For a closed
oriented n-dimensional manifold M , this invariant is a complex number given by the
function
ψ 7−→ hψ ∗ θ, σM i

Eθ (M, −) : Π1 (M, BG) −→ C,

(4.87)

on the groupoid Π1 (M, BG). This function is constant on isomorphism classes, i.e.
it is a 0-cocycle in the cohomology of the groupoid Π1 (M, BG). This cocycle is given
by the transgression of θ. More precisely, E(M, −) ∈ H 0 (Π1 (M, BG); U (1)) is the
image of θ under the transgression map τ : H n (M ; U (1)) −→ H 0 (Π1 (M, BG); U (1)).
We will now show that the invariant (higher line bundle) obtained from Eθ for
manifolds of dimension n − 1 and n − 2 equipped with bundles can also be described
by an appropriate transgression of θ.
Evaluating the primitive theory Eθ on a closed n − 1-dimensional Σ manifold
gives a line bundle Eθ (Σ, −) : BunG (Σ) ∼
= Π1 (Σ, BG) −→ VectC .
Proposition 4.88. Let G be a finite group and θ ∈ Z n (BG; U (1)). For any n − 1dimensional closed oriented manifold Σ the class hEθ (Σ, −)i ∈ H 1 (Π1 (Σ, BG); U (1))
describing the line bundle Eθ (Σ, −) : Π1 (Σ, BG) −→ VectC is given by
hEθ (Σ, −)i = τΣ θ,

(4.89)

i.e. by the transgression τΣ θ of θ to Π1 (Σ, BG).
Proof. By abuse of notation we will denote the non-extended theory that Eθ gives
rise to in the sense of Remark 4.73 also by Eθ . We fix a fundamental cycle σΣ of Σ.
This induces a linear isomorphism
Eθ (Σ, ϕ) −→ C
(4.90)
[σΣ ] 7−→ 1
for all ϕ : Σ −→ BG. Consider a morphism h : ϕ1 −→ ϕ2 in Π1 (Σ, BG), i.e. a map
h : [0, 1] × Σ −→ BG. We can factor h as
[0, 1] × Σ

h

h×id

ev

BGΣ × Σ

96

BG
(4.91)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

where we denote the image of h under the adjunction Σ × − a (−)Σ again by h.
The cocycle Z(Σ, −) evaluated on h is given by
Zθ (Σ, −)(h) = hh∗ θ, [0, 1] × σΣ i
= hev∗ θ, h × σΣ i

(4.92)

= τΣ θ .

We obtain by evaluation of Eθ on an n − 2-dimensional closed oriented manifold S a
representation Zθ (S, −) : Π2 (S, BG) −→ 2VectC of the second fundamental groupoid
of the mapping space BGS of maps from S to BG. Since BG is aspherical, this
reduces to a 2-line bundle
Zθ (S, −) : Π1 (S, BG) −→ 2VectC

(4.93)

over the groupoid of maps S −→ BG with equivalence classes of homotopies as
morphisms, i.e. the groupoid of G-bundles over S. This is accomplished by pulling
back along a fixed equivalence
b : Π1 (S, BG) −→ Π2 (S, BG)
−

(4.94)

being the identity on objects and sending a class h of homotopies to an arbitrary,
b are unique.
but fixed representative b
h. The coherence isomorphisms for −
Theorem 4.95. Let G be a finite group and θ ∈ Z n (BG; U (1)). Then for any n − 2dimensional closed oriented manifold S the class hEθ (S, −)i ∈ H 2 (Π1 (S, BG); U (1))
describing the 2-line bundle Eθ (S, −) : Π1 (S, BG) −→ 2VectC is given by
hEθ (S, −)i = τS θ,

(4.96)

i.e. by the transgression τS θ of θ to Π1 (S, BG).
Proof. As explained in Section 2.2.2 there is a 2-functor E^
θ (S, −) : Π1 (S, BG) −→
×
VectC // id //C such that
Π1 (S, BG)

Eθ (S,−)

2VectC
(4.97)

Eθ^
(S,−)

VectC // id //C×

commutes up to natural isomorphism. To compute E^
θ (S, −), we define for each
ξ ∈ Π1 (S, BG) the equivalence
χξ : Zθ (S, ξ) −→ VectC ,
97

V ∗ σ 7−→ V

(4.98)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

and fix the choice of a fundamental cycle σS of S to obtain a weak inverse
χ−1
ξ : VectC −→ Zθ (S, ξ),

V 7−→ V ∗ σS .

(4.99)

Next for any morphism h : ξ0 −→ ξ1 in Π1 (S, BG) we define the vector space Vbh by
the (weak) commutativity of the square
Zθ (S, ξ0 )

Z([0,1]×S,ĥ)

Zθ (S, ξ1 )
χ−1
ξ

χ ξ0

(4.100)

1

VectC

−⊗Vh
b

VectC

i.e.
Z σ∈Fund(S)
Vbh = χξ1

b
b
([0, 1] × S)h (σ, σS ) ∗ σ ∼
= ([0, 1] × S)h (σS , σS ).

(4.101)

Note that we have a canonical isomorphism
Vbh −→ C, [0, 1] × σS 7−→ 1.

(4.102)

For two composable morphisms h and h0 in Π1 (S, BG) we denote the composition
by h0 h and obtain the 2-isomorphism
evaluation of Eθ on

coherence

0
d
of E
hb0 b
h≃h
0 h).
Eθ ([0, 1] × S, hb0 )Eθ ([0, 1] × S, b
h) −−−−−θ−→ Eθ ([0, 1] × S, hb0 b
−
−−−h−−−→ Eθ ([0, 1] × S, hc
h) −−−−−
(4.103)

By (4.101) this amounts to a map
Vbh ⊗ Vhb0 −→ Vhb0bh −→ Vhd
0h,

(4.104)

which by means of (4.102) can be seen as an automorphism of C, i.e. an invertible
complex number. By construction this is the number αE^
(h, h0 ), i.e. the evaluaθ (S,−)
tion of αE^
∈ Z 2 (Π1 (S, BG); U (1)) on the 2-simplex defined by the composable
θ (S,−)
pair (h, h0 ).
By definition of Eθ we find
αE ^
(h, h0 ) = hH ∗ θ, νi,
(S,−)
θ

where
• ν is a fundamental cycle of [0, 1]2 × S satisfying (4.25)
0 h is a homotopy relative boundary.
• and H : hb0b
h −→ hc
Using the triangulation of [0, 1]2 given by

98

(4.105)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

ν−

ν+

ν∆

we get a fundamental cycle ν = ν− + v∆ + ν+ of [0, 1]2 . Then ν := ν × σS satisfies
e : ∆2 −→ BGS such that
(4.25). To get a representative for H we pick a 2-simplex H
0 h. This is possible since BGS is aspherical. Using
e = hb0 , ∂1 H
e =b
e = hc
∂0 H
h and ∂2 H
2
S
the map  : [0, 1] −→ BG sketched in Figure 4.3 we define
ev

×id

H : [0, 1]2 × S −−−→ BGS × S −
→ BG,

(4.106)

where ev : BGS × S −→ BG denotes the evaluation.
BGS
ĥ2 ◦ ĥ1
∆h2 ,h1
H̃

h\
2 ◦ h1
Figure 4.3: Sketch for the definition of  : [0, 12 ] −→ BGS . The map is constant
along the vertical lines.
Now we find
αE^
(h, h0 ) = hH ∗ θ, νi
(S,−)
θ

(4.107)
= hθ, H∗ (ν− × σS )i + hθ, H∗ (ν∆ × σS )i + hθ, H∗ (ν+ × σS )i .
Without loss of generality we can work with a normalized representative for θ (see
Proposition 4.67) which then vanishes on the degenerate simplices H∗ (ν− × σS ) and
99

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

H∗ (ν+ × σS ). Hence, we are left with
αEeθ (S,−) (h, h0 ) = hθ, H∗ (ν∆ × σS )i = hev∗ θ, ∗ ν∆ × σS i
(4.108)
∗

e × σS i = τS θ(h, h0 ) .
= hev θ, H
This proves the assertion.

4.1.4

Quantum Dijkgraaf-Witten theories

The space of field configurations of a discrete gauge theory is the essentially finite
groupoid of G-bundles. There exists a well-defined integration theory over such
groupoids, which we review in Appendix B.3. The existence of such a measure
makes the path integral quantization straightforward.
The invariant assigned to an n-dimensional closed manifold M is the path integral
Z
ZDWθ (M ) :=
Eθ (M, ψ) .
(4.109)
ψ∈BunG (M )

We use the extended orbifold construction of Schweigert and Woike [73] to define the
quantum theory as an extended topological field theory
ZDWθ : Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC .

(4.110)

The advantage of this approach is that it ensures that the result is a symmetric monoidal 2-functor. For a concrete construction of Dijkgraaf-Witten theories
as extended field theories, see [114] and [115] for the fully extended field theory.
One of the central results of [73] is the construction of an orbifoldization functor
−/G from n-dimensional extended G-equivariant topological field theories to ndimensional extended ordinary (i.e. non-equivariant) topological field theories. The
orbifoldization combines a sum over twisted sectors with the computation of (homotopy) invariants by means of the parallel section functor developed in [91]. Let
E : G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC be an extended quantum field theory. We explain
the orbifold construction on closed manifolds of dimension n, n − 1 and n − 2. The
orbifold theory E/G assigns to an n-dimensional manifold M the “path integral”
Z
E/G(M ) :=
E(M, ψ) .
(4.111)
ψ∈BunG (M )

Restricting E to the bundle groupoid over a closed n − 1-dimensional manifold gives
rise to a vector bundle E(Σ, ·) : BunG (Σ) −→ VectC . The topological field theory
E/G assigns to Σ the vector space of parallel sections of this vector bundle. This
space is the limit (in the categorical sense) of E(Σ, ·). We write this space suggestive
as an end (see Example 3.89)
Z
E/G(Σ) :=
E(Σ, ϕ) .
(4.112)
ϕ∈BunG (M )

100

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Similarly, the value on an n − 2 dimensional manifold S is the 2-vector space of
parallel sections of the 2-vector bundle E(S, ·) : BunG (S) −→ 2VectC .
Definition 4.113. For a finite group G and θ ∈ H n (BG; U (1)) the n-dimensional
θ-twisted Dijkgraaf-Witten theory
ZDWθ : Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC
with gauge group G is defined to be the orbifold theory Eθ /G of the extended field
theory Eθ : G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC associated to θ.
We briefly explain the relation between Dijkgraaf-Witten theories and concepts
from representation theory. We will highlight how topological arguments can be used
to prove results about algebraic objects. Let us first give the following formula for
the number of simple objects in the category ZDWθ (Tn−2 ) obtained by evaluation of
the twisted Dijkgraaf-Witten theory on the n − 2-dimensional torus Tn−2 . It follows
as a special case from [73, Theorem 4.21]:
Proposition 4.114. For a finite group G, θ ∈ H n (BG; U (1))
X
1
hψg∗1 ,...,gn θ, σTn i ,
#{simple objects of ZDWθ (Tn−2 )} =
|G|
g ,...,g ∈G
1

(4.115)

n

mutually commuting

where
• ψg1 ,...,gn : Tn −→ BG is a classifying map for the G-bundle P over Tn specified
by the holonomy values g1 , . . . , gn ∈ G,
• σTn is the fundamental class of the torus.
Proof. For any extended topological quantum field theory Z, the number of simple
objects of the 2-vector space Z(Tn−2 ) is given by the number Z(Tn ) assigned to the
n-torus. This proves
#{simple objects in ZDWθ (Tn−2 )} = ZDWθ (Tn ).

(4.116)

Now the definition of Zθ and the formula for the orbifold theory on closed oriented
top-dimensional manifolds given in [73, Proposition 3.47] yield the result.
We now focus on Dijkgraaf-Witten theories (see Definition 4.113) in 2-dimensions:
Proposition 4.117. For any finite group G and θ ∈ H 2 (BG; U (1)) the evaluation
of the topological quantum field theory ZDWθ = Eθ /G : Cob2,1,0 −→ 2VectC on the
point is given by the category of θ-twisted projective representations of G.
Proof. The groupoid Π1 (?, BG) is equivalent to the groupoid ?//G with one object
and automorphism group G. By Theorem 4.95 (note that the transgression is the
identity in that case) we find that the 2-vector bundle Eθ (?, −) is given by
θ

?//G −→ VectC // id //C× −→ 2VectC ,
101

(4.118)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

where θ is understood as a 2-functor. According to the definition of the orbifold, the
2-vector space ZDWθ (?) is given by the category of 1-morphisms from the trivial line
bundle over ?//G to ZDWθ (?, −), i.e. by the parallel sections of ZDWθ (?, −). Spelling
this out we see that ZDWθ (?) is the category of projective representation twisted by
θ, see Section 2.2.2.
Given the explicit description of ZDWθ (?) provided by Proposition 4.117 in the
two-dimensional case, we can compute the number of irreducible θ-twisted representation of G by using Proposition 4.114. The right hand side of (4.115), i.e. the value
of θ-twisted Dijkgraaf-Witten theory on the torus, already appears in [70, Equation
(6.40)], although we should note that the reasoning in the proof of Proposition 4.114
is only valid because we have described twisted two-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten
theory as an extended quantum field theory. Now (4.115) reduces to
1 X θ(h, g)
(4.119)
#{irreducible θ-twisted representation of G} =
|G| gh=hg θ(g, h)
and hence to the result found in [75, Corollary 13] by algebraic methods.
Example 4.120. We give a few concrete examples of 2-cocycles:
(a) The group cohomology H 2 (ZN × ZN ; U (1)) is ZN . If we write the cyclic group
ZN additively then the non-trivial 2-cocycle corresponding to k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N −
1} is

 2π i k

(4.121)
a1 b 2
ωk (a1 , b1 ) , (a2 , b2 ) = exp
N
with (a1 , b1 ), (a2 , b2 ) ∈ ZN × ZN . For N = 2, the partition function Zω1 (T2 ) on
T2 for the non-trivial Z2 × Z2 cocycle is 1 corresponding to the fact that there
exists only one ω1 -twisted irreducible representation of Z2 × Z2 [75].
(b) The degree 2 group cohomology of the dihedral group D8 = ha, b | a4 = b2 =
1 , b a b−1 = a−1 i with values in U (1) is Z2 . The non-trivial 2-cocycle is given
by [123, Section 3.7]
(

1
, j=0,
i j
i0 j 0

ω a b ,a b =
(4.122)
2π i 0
exp 4 i
, j=1.
Moving up to 3-dimensions one finds
Theorem 4.123. For any finite group G and θ ∈ H 3 (BG; U (1)) the evaluation of
ZDWθ = Eθ /G on the circle is given by the representation category of the θ-twisted
Drinfeld double of G.
Proof. The 2-vector space associated to S 1 is the space of parallel sections of the
2-line bundle τ θ : G//G −→ ?// ? //C× −→ 2VectC . This 2-vector space is given, as
explained in detail in Section 2.2.2 by the category of τS1 θ-twisted representations of
the action groupoid G//G. By [75, Proposition 8 and Theorem 17] this category is
the representation category of the twisted Drinfeld double [124].
102

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

This result implies for instance that we can get from Proposition 4.114 an easy
topological proof of the formula for the number of irreducible representations of the
θ-twisted Drinfeld double given in [75, Theorem 21].
Moreover, we see that the θ-twisted Dijkgraaf-Witten theory of Definition 4.113
generalizes the θ-twisted Dijkgraaf-Witten theory constructed in [114] for the 32-1-dimensional case to arbitrary dimension because they yield the same modular
category upon evaluation on the circle, which is sufficient by the classification result
of [84].
Example 4.124. The cohomology group H 3 (ZN ; U (1)) is ZN . The 3-cocycles have
the concrete form [125, Proposition 2.3]
ωk (a, b, c) = exp

 2π i k j b + c k
a
N
N

(4.125)

for a, b, c, k ∈ ZN = {0, 1, . . . , N − 1}, where brc denotes the integer part of the real
number r ∈ R, i.e. the largest integer less than or equal to r. These theories are
studied in [126]. They have been extended to a product of an arbitrary number of
cyclic groups ZNi (i.e. a generic finite abelian group) in [19, 127].

4.1.5

Equivariant Dijkgraaf-Witten theories

In Section 4.2.3 we will use an equivariant version of the Dijkgraaf-Witten theories
generalizing work of [122]: as a generalization of the orbifold construction, we get
for any morphism λ : H −→ J of finite groups a pushforward map λ∗ from Hequivariant to J-equivariant topological field theories, see [72, Section 6] for the nonextended case and [73, Section 3.3] for the extended case needed here. The orbifold
construction is recovered as the push along the group homomorphism G −→ 1 to
the group 1 with one element.
Definition 4.126. Let λ : H −→ J be a morphism of finite groups and θ ∈
H n (BH; U (1)). The θ-twisted J-equivariant Dijkgraaf-Witten theory ZDW λθ := λ∗ Eθ :
J-Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC is defined to be the pushforward of Eθ along λ.
Remark 4.127. This construction can be generalized as follows: Given a sequence
of finite groups
λ

λ

λ

n
1
2
G0 −→
G1 −→
. . . −→
Gn

(4.128)

and 3-cocycles θj ∈ H 3 (BGj ; U (1)) for 0 ≤ j ≤ n we can construct the Gn equivariant topological quantum field theory
λn∗ (· · · (λ2∗ (λ1∗ Zθ0 ⊗ Zθ1 ) ⊗ · · · ) ⊗ Zθn−1 ) ⊗ Zθn .

(4.129)

Corresponding to this theory there exists a potentially interesting Gn -multimodular
tensor category.
103

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

We will now provide an explicit description of the corresponding non-extended
field theory
ZDW λθ : G-Cobn −→ VectC

(4.130)

b −→ G, which will be crucial for the
for a surjective group homomorphism λ : G
constructions in Section 4.2.3. Let Σ be an n−1-dimensional closed manifold. The
group homomorphism λ induces an extension functor
λ∗ : BunGb (Σ) −→ BunG (Σ) .

(4.131)

b −→ BG
This functor acts on classifying maps by post-composition with the map B G
b
induced by λ : G −→ G, which by a slight abuse of notation we denote again by λ.
For a bundle ϕ ∈ BunG (Σ) we denote by λ−1
∗ [ϕ] the homotopy fibre (see Appendix B)
λ−1
∗ [ϕ]

BunGb (Σ)
λ∗

∗

(4.132)

BunG (Σ)

ϕ

b
b h) of a G-bundle
ϕ
b and a gauge transforConcretely, objects of λ−1
∗ [ϕ] are pairs (ϕ,
mation h : λ∗ ϕ
b −→ ϕ. Morphisms are gauge transformations b
h: ϕ
b −→ ϕ
b 0 such that
the diagram
λ∗ b
h

λ∗ ϕ
b

λ∗ ϕ
b0

(4.133)

h0

h

ϕ
commutes. The theory ZDW λθ is defined on an object (Σ, ϕ : Σ −→ BG) as
Z


Lω
b
λ
ZDW θ (Σ, ϕ) =
λ−1
[ϕ]
−→
Bun
(Σ)
−
→
Vect
.
b
C
∗
G

(4.134)

λ−1
∗ [ϕ]

This should be regarded as a quantization of the D = ker(λ)-gauge fields while
leaving the G-sector classical. This limit can be realized as a vector space of parallel
sections. In this case a parallel section f ∈ ZDW λθ (Σ, ϕ) consists of an element
f (ϕ,
b h) ∈ Eθ (Σ, ϕ)
b for all (ϕ,
b h) ∈ λ−1
∗ [ϕ] satisfying
f (ϕ
b0 , h0 ) = Eθ ([0, 1] × Σ, b
h)f (ϕ, h)

(4.135)

for all morphisms b
h : (ϕ, h) −→ (ϕ0 , h0 ). Let (M, ψ) : (Σa , ϕa ) −→ (Σb , ϕb ) be
a morphism in G-Cob. To define the pushforward on a parallel section f ( · ) ∈
ZDW λθ (Σa , ϕa ) we fix fundamental cycles σa and σb of Σa and Σb , respectively, and

104

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

write f as f ( · ) = f ( · ) [σa ]. We define
ZDW λθ (M, ψ)[f ](ϕ
bb , hb )
=

Z

b [0, 1] × σb
b
h∗ θ,

b b
(ψ,h,
h )∈λ−1
∗ [ψ]|(ϕ
bb ,hb )

b σM f ψ|
b Σa , h|Σa
ψb∗ θ,



[σb ]
(4.136)

with σM ∈ Fundσσba (M ); here the homotopy pullback λ−1
bb ,hb ) is the groupoid
∗ [ψ]|(ϕ
b
b
b
b
b
with objects (ψ, h, h ) where ψ : M −→ B G is a G-bundle, h : λ∗ ψb −→ ψ is a gauge
transformation, and b
h : ψb |Σb −→ ϕ
bb is a gauge transformation such that the diagram
h
λ∗ b

λ∗ ψb Σ

λ∗ ϕ
bb

b

(4.137)
h|Σb

hb

ϕb

commutes.
Remark 4.138. For concrete computations it is sometimes helpful to note that for
surjective λ the induced map BunGb (M ) −→ BunG (M ) is a fibration of groupoids
(see Section B) in most models for the bundle groupoid. This allows us to replace
homotopy fibres with ordinary fibres. For example to describe the ordinary DijkgraafWitten theory corresponding to the group homomorphism G −→ 1 we can describe
the groupoid of principal 1-bundles on a manifold Σ by the terminal groupoid with one
object and one morphism. Every map into the terminal groupoid is a fibration. The
description of the vector space ZDWθ (Σ) by parallel sections reduces to: a parallel
section f consists of an
 element f (ϕ) ∈ Eθ (Σ, ϕ) for all ϕ ∈ BunG (Σ) such that
Eθ ([0, 1] × Σ, h) f (ϕ) = f (ϕ0 ) for all gauge transformations h : ϕ −→ ϕ0 . The
space of parallel sections can be regarded as the space of gauge-invariant functions on
the set of classical gauge field configurations. For this reason the definition can be
interpreted as an implementation of the Gauss Law in quantum gauge theory, which
requires that physical states must be gauge-invariant.
Now consider a cobordism M : Σ1 −→ Σ2 . We fix representatives σ1 and σ2 of
the fundamental classes of Σ1 and Σ2 , respectively. This allows us to express the
value of a parallel section f ∈ ZDWθ (Σ1 ) on a principal G-bundle ϕ1 ∈ BunG (Σ1 ) as
f (ϕ1 ) = f (ϕ1 ) [σ1 ] with f (ϕ1 ) ∈ C. The definition of ZDWθ in (4.136) reduces to
Z

∗
∗
ZDWθ (M )(f )(ϕ2 ) =
hh θ, [0, 1] × σ2 i hψ θ, σM i f (ψ|Σ1 ) [σ2 ] ,
(ψ,h)∈BunG (M )|ϕ2

(4.139)
where σM is a representative for the fundamental class of M satisfying ∂σM = σ2 −σ1
and we consider the gauge transformation h as a homotopy h : [0, 1] × Σ2 −→ BG.
This definition is independent of all choices involved.
105

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

4.2

Discrete symmetries and ’t Hooft anomalies

In this section we study actions of a finite group G as symmetries of a DijkgraafWitten theory with gauge group D and topological action ω ∈ Z n (BD; (1)). These
actions are closely related to non-abelian group cohomology, which we review in
Section 4.2.2. Afterwards we study the gauging of the symmetry group G in Section 4.2.3. It is not always possible to gauge a given symmetry. A ’t Hooft anomaly
is an obstruction to the gauging of symmetries. The corresponding obstruction theory, which is the content of Section 4.2.4 is encoded by the Lyndon-Hochschild-Serre
spectral sequence.

4.2.1

Discrete symmetries of Dijkgraaf-Witten theories

So far all symmetries considered in this thesis where encoded as limit morphisms
in the bicategory of cobordisms with background fields CobF
n,n−1,n−2 . Symmetries of
this type correspond to the natural notion of isomorphisms of F -background fields
and are present in any quantum field theory defined on CobF
n,n−1,n−2 .
In addition, a particular theory can be invariant under additional transformations
of background gauge fields. For example a field theory containing a complex valued
scalar field might be invariant under complex conjugation of the field; or might not.
It is this type of symmetry we study in this section for the theory Eω and ZDWω .
Before asking if Eω is invariant under a transformation of background fields we
first need to implement the action. For the symmetry to be compatible with cutting
and gluing of manifolds, we describe it as an endofunctor of D-Cob acting by pullback
along the inverse on a field theory. There is a natural way to construct endofunctors
of D-Cob from homeomorphisms of BD which is described by a 2-functor
R : ∗ //Π1 [BD, BD] −→ ∗//End(D-Cob) ,

(4.140)

where Π1 [BD, BD] is the category with continuous maps BD −→ BD as objects and
equivalence classes of homotopies as morphisms. Concretely, R sends a continuous
map χ : BD −→ BD to the endofunctor
R(χ) : D-Cob −→ D-Cob
(Σ, ϕ : Σ −→ BD) 7−→ (Σ, χ ◦ ϕ : Σ −→ BD)


(M, ψ) : (Σ1 , ϕ1 ) −→ (Σ2 , ϕ2 ) 7−→ (M, χ ◦ ψ) : (Σ1 , χ ◦ ϕ1 ) −→ (Σ2 , χ ◦ ϕ2 )
(4.141)
and a homotopy h : χ1 −→ χ2 to the natural transformation R(h) : R(χ1 ) =⇒ R(χ2 )
with components
R(h)(Σ,ϕ) = ([0, 1] × Σ, h ◦ idϕ )
106

(4.142)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

where h ◦ idϕ denotes the horizontal composition of homotopies. The naturality of
R(h) follows from Lemma 2.112 adjusted to D-Cob. By the bicategorical Yoneda
Lemma, automorphisms of BD correspond to automorphisms of the stack of principal
D-bundles (which is represented by BD). Hence a symmetry corresponding to a
homeomorphism of BD acts on the space of field configurations.3
To define a symmetry, the group G only has to act up to gauge transformations.
Recall that for finite groups, gauge transformations and homotopies between classifying maps are in one-to-one correspondence. For this reason we expect a symmetry
for every action of G on BD up to a ‘homotopy’ which preserves ω. Since BD is a
homotopy 1-type, we can work with the following concrete description.
Definition 4.143. An action of G on BD up to (coherent) homotopy is a 2-functor
α : ∗ //G −→ ∗//Π1 [BD, BD] ,

(4.144)

where ∗//G is considered as a 2-category with one object, the group G as 1-morphisms
and only identity 2-morphisms.
Remark 4.145. To unpack this compact definition note that the category Π1 [BD, BD]
is equivalent to the action groupoid
[π1 (BD), π1 (BD)]//D = EndGrp (D)//D ,

(4.146)

where the action of D on a group homomorphism is by conjugation. Every action of G
up to homotopy takes values in the full subgroupoid AutGrp (D)//D of automorphisms
of D. An arbitrary 2-functor ∗//G −→ ∗//(AutGrp (D)//D) is called a non-abelian
group cocycle [128, 129]. Hence, homotopy coherent actions on BD are classified
by non-abelian group cocycles. Non-abelian cocycles also appear in the construction
of equivariant Dijkgraaf-Witten theories [122] under the name weak 2-cocycles. We
discuss non-abelian group cohomology in more detail in Section 4.2.2.
If D is abelian there are no morphisms between different objects in AutGrp (D)//D.
This implies that an action up to homotopy of G on BD is given by a proper action of
G on D and a group 2-cocycle in H 2 (BG; D) describing the coherence isomorphisms
of the corresponding 2-functor. This agrees with the physical description in [12].
For every action α : ∗//G −→ ∗//Π1 [BD, BD] up to homotopy the 2-functor
(4.140) induces via pullbacks a 2-functor
ρ : ∗//G −→ D-TFTn //EndCat (D-TFTn ) ,→ Cat
∗
g 7−→ R α(g ) ,

(4.147)

−1

where we denote by Cat the 2-category of categories and by D-TFTn the category of
n-dimensional D-equivariant topological field theories.
3

More generally, automorphisms of a stack F induce endofunctors of the category CobF
n .

107

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

The (exponentiated) action of a gauge theory can be considered as a gaugeinvariant map from the space of field configurations on an n-dimensional manifold
M , in our case BunD (M ), to U (1). An action of G on the space of field configurations
induces an action via pullbacks on the set of gauge-invariant functions from the space
of field configurations to U (1). A theory admits the symmetry G if its (exponentiated) action is invariant under this action, i.e. it is a fixed point. By categorification
we arrive at the following description.
Definition 4.148. A D-equivariant field theory with kinematical symmetry4 described by
ρ : ∗//G −→ D-TFTn //EndCat (D-TFTn ) ,

(4.149)

as in (4.147), is a homotopy fixed point of ρ, i.e. a natural 2-transformation Z : 1 =⇒
ρ, where 1 is the unique 2-functor sending ∗ to the category with one object and only
identity morphisms.
Remark 4.150. Unpacking the definition, a D-equivariant field theory with kinematical symmetry consists of
(a) A functor Z : 1 −→ D-TFTn ; and
(b) Natural transformations Υg : ρ(g)[Z] =⇒ Z for all g ∈ G;
satisfying natural coherence conditions. Since 1 represents the identity 2-functor on
Cat this is the same as a field theory Z ∈ D-TFTn , together with coherent natural
symmetric monoidal transformations Υg : R(α(g −1 ))∗ Z =⇒ Z for g ∈ G.
An arbitrary Dijkgraaf-Witten theory with topological action ω ∈ Z n (BD; U (1))
does not admit a kinematical symmetry in general. On the other hand, there may
be different ways to equip a given field theory with the structure of a homotopy fixed
point. We give a sufficient condition for a kinematical symmetry to exist. For this
we need to introduce the following notion.
Definition 4.151. An n-cocycle ω ∈ Z n (BD; U (1)) is preserved by the action α if
it can be equipped with the structure of a homotopy fixed point for the induced action
of G via the pullback along α(g −1 ) on the category Z n (BD; U (1)) whose morphisms
are n−1-cochains up to coboundaries.
In general there are non-isomorphic choices for the fixed point structure. A
necessary condition for such a fixed point to exist is α(g)∗ [ω] = [ω] for all g ∈ G.
Remark 4.152. Concretely, the additional structure consists of an equivalence class
of cochains Φg ∈ C n−1 (BD; U (1)) up to coboundary satisfying5 δΦg = ω − α(g −1 )∗ ω.
These cochains have to satisfy the coherence relations
Φg1 + α(g1−1 )∗ Φg2 = Φg1 g2 + σg1 ,g2 [ω] ,
4

(4.153)

The name is taken from [130] where similar symmetries of 3-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten
theories are studied.
5
Throughout we switch freely between the additive and multiplicative notation for U (1)-valued
cocycles.

108

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

up to coboundary terms, where σg1 ,g2 [ω] is the n−1-cochain induced by the homotopy
σg1 ,g2 : α(g2−1 ) ◦ α(g1−1 ) −→ α(g2−1 g1−1 ). The difference between two homotopy fixed
point structures can be described by a group homomorphism G −→ H n−1 (BD; U (1)).
Proposition 4.154. Let ω ∈ Z n (BD; U (1)) be a topological action and α : ∗//G −→
∗//Π1 [BD, BD] a homotopy coherent action of G on BD. If α preserves ω, then
the classical Dijkgraaf-Witten theory Eω : D-Cob −→ VectC admits a kinematical
symmetry described by α.
Proof. We set Z = Eω and define natural transformations Υg : Eα(g−1 )∗ ω =⇒ Eω by
Υg (Σ,ϕ) : Eα(g−1 )∗ ω (Σ, ϕ) −→ Eω (Σ, ϕ)
(4.155)
∗

[σΣ ] 7−→ hϕ Φg , σΣ i [σΣ ] ,
where Φg is the n−1-cochain of Remark 4.152 satisfying δΦg = ω − α(g −1 )∗ ω. That
this defines a natural isomorphism follows from Proposition 4.67. The coherence
conditions follow from the fact that the collection Φg corresponds to a homotopy
fixed point structure.
Now we study the incarnation of kinematic symmetries in the quantum theory
ZDWω . We describe the symmetries of quantum Dijkgraaf-Witten theory following [17, Section 2.4] by the following notion.
Definition 4.156. Let G be a finite group and denote by G-Rep the category of
finite-dimensional G-representations. Let Z : Cobn −→ VectC be a topological field
theory. An internal G-symmetry of Z is a lift
G-Rep
ZG

Cobn

(4.157)
Z

VectC

of Z, where G-Rep −→ VectC is the forgetful functor.
Remark 4.158. This definition is equivalent to fixing a group homomorphism G −→
Aut⊗ (Z) to the group of symmetric monoidal natural automorphisms of Z.
Kinematical symmetries of classical Dijkgraaf-Witten theories extend to the quantum theory: For a fixed manifold Σ, Υg induces a natural isomorphism Eω ◦R(α(g −1 ))|BunD (Σ) −→
Eω |BunD (Σ) , which induces a linear map
Z
Z

−1
Eω ◦ R α(g ) −→
Eω = Zω (Σ) .
(4.159)
BunD (Σ)

BunD (Σ)

109

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

The equivalence R(α(g −1 )) induces a morphism
Z
Z
ZDWω (Σ) =
Eω −→
BunD (Σ)


Eω ◦ R α(g −1 ) .

(4.160)

BunD (Σ)

The action of G consisting of ϕg : ZDWω (Σ) −→ ZDWω (Σ) is defined as the composition of these two maps. If the fixed point structure is the one constructed in
Proposition 4.154 the action has the following concrete description: fixing a fundamental class σΣ of Σ as in (4.139), and a parallel section f ( · ) = f ( · ) [σΣ ] ∈ ZDWω ,
the action of G on ZDWω (Σ) takes the concrete form

g . f (Σ, ϕ) = f R(α(g −1 ))[Σ, ϕ] hϕ∗ Φg , σΣ i
(4.161)
with δΦg = ω − α(g −1 )∗ ω as in the proof of Proposition 4.154.
Proposition 4.162. The collection ϕg defines a representation of G on the state
spaces ZDWω (Σ) such that ZDWω is a functor into the category G-Rep of finitedimensional G-representations.
Proof. This is a direct consequence of the functoriality of the orbifold construction
[72, Remark 3.43] and the coherence conditions for the homotopy fixed point.
Example 4.163. The trivial action of G on BD is always an internal G-symmetry.
Any action of G is an internal G-symmetry for a theory with trivial topological Lagrangian. We will provide some more profound examples in Sections 4.2.2 and 4.2.3.

4.2.2

Non-abelian group cohomology

Following [129] we review non-abelian group 2-cocycles and show how they classify
extensions. For simplicity we only discuss groups, which is enough for the study of
anomalies in Dijkgraaf-Witten theories. The generalisation to groupoids is straightforward. Let G and D be finite groups. Recall from Section 4.2.1 that a non-abelian
2-cocycle on G with coefficients in D is a 2-functor α : ∗//G −→ ∗//(AutGrp (D)//D) ⊂
Grpd, where Grpd is the 2-category of groupoids. The 2-category ∗//(AutGrp (D)//D)
can be considered as a full sub-2-category of Grpd by sending the only object to
the groupoid ∗//D. We assume without loss of generality that α preserves identities strictly. Spelling out the definition, we see that α consists of maps of sets
α : G −→ AutGrp (D) and σα : G × G −→ D satisfying
α(1) = idD ,

(4.164)

σα (1, 1) = 1 ,

(4.165)



α(g1 g2 )[d] = σα (g1 , g2 )−1 α(g1 ) α(g2 )[d] σα (g1 , g2 ) ,


σα (g1 , g2 ) σα (g1 g2 , g3 ) = α(g1 ) σα (g2 , g3 ) σα (g1 , g2 g3 ) .
110

(4.166)
(4.167)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Using the Grothendieck construction, the 2-functor α : ∗//G −→ Grpd induces a
fibration of groupoids
Z
α −→ ∗//G
(4.168)
having the following concrete description: There is only one object which we denote
by ∗, endomorphisms are given by pairs (g, d) ∈ G × D and composition is defined
by

(g2 , d2 ) (g1 , d1 ) = g2 g1 , d2 α(g2 )[d1 ] σα (g2 , g1 ) .
(4.169)
The fibration corresponds to an extension of G by D, i.e. an exact sequence
b −→ G −→ 1 ,
1 −→ D −→ G

(4.170)

b = EndR α (∗). It is a classical result that extensions of G by D are classified
with G
by non-abelian 2-cocycles on G with coefficients in D [131]. A proof using the
Grothendieck construction can be found in [129].
We give a few explicit examples.
Example 4.171. For every pair of groups (G, D) there is a trivial non-abelian 2cocycle corresponding to the constant 2-functor ∗//G −→ ∗//(AutGrp (D)//D). The
corresponding extension is
1 −→ D −→ D × G −→ G −→ 1 .

(4.172)

Example 4.173. If D is abelian and α : G −→ AutGrp (D) is trivial, then a nonabelian 2-cocycle reduces to an ordinary 2-cocycle σ ∈ H 2 (G; D) and the corresponding extensions are the usual central extensions classified by the abelian 2-cocycle.
From a physical point of view such a 2-cocycle can appear if the G-action on matter
fields only closes up to a D-gauge transformation. We give two concrete examples
for later use. Let N and M be positive integers. Identifying the cyclic groups ZN
and ZM with {0, 1, . . . , N − 1} and {0, 1, . . . , M − 1} we define the 2-cocycle
σ : ZM × ZM −→ ZN
(a, b) 7−→

ja + bk
M

(4.174)
mod N .

The corresponding central extension is
M·

0 −→ ZN −−→ ZN M −→ ZM −→ 0 ,

(4.175)

where the first map is multiplication by M and the second map is reduction modulo
N . This example can be adapted to an arbitrary number of copies of ZN and ZM .
An example is the abelian 2-cocycle corresponding to
(M,M ) ·

(0, 0) −→ ZN × ZN −−−−→ ZN M × ZN M −→ ZM × ZM −→ (0, 0)
111

(4.176)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

which is given by
(ZM × ZM )2 −→ ZN × ZN


(a1 , b1 ) , (a2 , b2 ) 7−→

j a + a k
1

2

M

mod N ,

jb + b k
1

2

M

mod N



(4.177)
.

Example 4.178. Given a group homomorphism α : G −→ AutGrp (D), we can consider α as a non-abelian 2-cocycle with trivial map σα . The corresponding extension
is the semi-direct product
1 −→ D −→ G nα D −→ G −→ 1 .

(4.179)

We give a second point of view on non-abelian group cohomology using the (∞, 1)topos of infinity groupoids or alternatively the 3-category of 2-groupoids following
[132]. A non-abelian 2-cocycle is a 1-morphism α : BG −→ B(Aut(D)//D) where
Aut(D)//D is the 2-group with automorphisms of D as objects and conjugation by
elements of D as morphisms. The homotopy pullback of the diagram
∗
(4.180)
α

BG

B(Aut(D)//D)

is given by
∗

b
Aut(D)//G

(4.181)
α

BG

B(Aut(D)//D)

b as above. We can see this as follows: The homotopy pullback can be
with G
calculated as an ordinary pullback of the universal Aut(D)//D principal 2-bundle
E(Aut(D)//D) over B(Aut(D)//D), which can be explicitly construced [133, Section
5] as follows
• Objects are elements of Aut(D);
• A 1-morphism f1 −→ f2 is a triangle
f1

•

•

d

f2

112

f (d)

•

(4.182)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

in Aut(D)//D with d ∈ D and f (d) ∈ Aut(D). Horizontal composition of
1-morphisms is defined by
f1

•

•

f (d1 )

d1

•

= •

•

d2 f (d2 )[d1 ]

f (d2 )f (d1 )

(4.183)

f (d2 )

d2

•

•

f2

• A 2 morphism (d1 , f (d1 )) −→ (d2 , f (d2 )) is an element d ∈ D such that
•

f1

•

d1

f2

f (d1 )

d

f1

−→ f (d2 )

= •

•

•
d2

f2

f (d2 )

(4.184)

•

Note that d = d−1
1 d2 . Horizontal composition is given d2 ◦ d1 = d2 f2 [d1 ] and
vertical composition is defined by multiplication in D.
There is a natural fibration
π : E(Aut(D)//D) −→ B(Aut(D)//D)
f 7−→ ∗
(4.185)
(d, f (d)) 7−→ f (d)
d 7−→ d .
This allows us to calculate the homotopy pullback as a regular pullback:
• Objects are elements of Aut(D);
• Morphisms are pairs of morphisms


f1
•








g, •
f (d) 
d






•
f2
such that f (d) = λ(g);
• There are only identity 2-morphisms.
113

(4.186)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Composition is defined by

f2

 
•





g2 , •




 
 
 
 
λ(g2 )  ◦ g1 , •
 
 
 
•

d2

f3



f1

•




λ(g1 ) 



•

d1

f2

(4.187)




•




= g2 g1 , •




λ(g1 )

d1

•
λ(g2 )

d2

•





λ(g2 g1 ) 




(4.188)

where the unlabelled 2-morphisms are part of the definition of α. This reproduces the
b This gives a graphical way to think about the multiplication
composition law in G.
b
in G, which we found helpful for concrete computations.
Taking repetitively homotopy fibres of the homotopy fibre computed with respect
to the base point gives the fibre sequence to the left
∗

G
Ωα

Aut(D)//D

b
Aut(D)//G

∗

BG

∗

α

(4.189)

B(Aut(D)//D)

where Ωα is the looping of α. The new homotopy pullbacks in the fibre sequence
can be calculated by the pasting property and looping. There are natural funcb −→ Aut(D)//G
b and ιD : BD −→ Aut(D)//D. We get from the boxed
tors ιGb : B G
elements the following commuting diagram
BD

b
BG

ιD

ιG
b

Aut(D)//D

b
Aut(D)//G

encoding the exact sequence of groups.

114

(4.190)
BG

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

4.2.3

Gauging discrete symmetries

Now we define what it means to gauge the symmetries from Section 4.2.1. There
is an inclusion of categories i : Cobn ,→ G-Cobn for every group G by equipping
every manifold with the trivial G-bundle. The pullback i∗ ZG : Cobn −→ VectC of
a G-equivariant field theory ZG : G-Cobn −→ VectC carries additional structure:
By evaluating ZG on gauge transformations of the trivial G-bundle on an n−1dimensional manifold Σ we get a representation of G on i∗ ZG (Σ) which is compatible
with the definition on cobordisms. Hence i∗ ZG is a quantum field theory with internal
G-symmetry in the sense of Definition 4.156, i.e. a symmetric monoidal functor
i∗ ZG : Cobn −→ G-Rep .

(4.191)

Recall that we considered a G-equivariant field theory as a field theory coupled to
classical G-gauge fields. Given a field theory Z : Cobn −→ G-Rep with internal Gsymmetry we can ask if the symmetry can be gauged.
Definition 4.192. Let Z : Cobn −→ G-Rep be a topological quantum field theory with
internal G-symmetry. A G-equivariant field theory ZG : G-Cob −→ VectC gauges the
internal G-symmetry if i∗ ZG = Z as functors Cobn −→ G-Rep.
In general it may be impossible to gauge a given symmetry due to cohomological
obstructions. In this case we say that the symmetry has a ’t Hooft anomaly. In the
following we will study under which conditions the symmetries discussed in Section
4.2.1 have ’t Hooft anomalies.
Remark 4.193. In three dimensions the question of whether a given field theory can
be gauged is related to an interesting algebraic problem [134]. A three-dimensional
extended topological quantum field theory is described by a modular tensor category
M [84]. An internal G-symmetry corresponds to a homotopy coherent action of G on
M via braided autoequivalences. The group of braided autoequivalences up to natural
isomorphism is known as the Brauer-Picard group. The modular tensor category corresponding to the Dijkgraaf-Witten theory with gauge group D and topological action
ω ∈ Z 3 (BD; U (1)) is the category of finite-dimensional modules over the ω-twisted
Drinfeld double of the group algebra C[D], see Theorem 4.123. The corresponding
Brauer-Picard group for ω = 0 is studied in detail in [135]. The more general case
of the representation category of Hopf algebras which includes the case of non-trivial
ω is studied in [136]. The kinematical symmetries studied in this paper correspond
to the subgroup of classical symmetries in [136]. Three-dimensional G-equivariant
extended field theories correspond to G-modular categories [73, 137]. The symmetry
corresponding to a homotopy coherent action of G on a modular tensor
L category M
can be gauged if there exists a G-(multi) modular category MG =
g∈G Mg such
that M1 = M in a compatible way. The question of under which conditions such an
extension exists is answered in [138], whereby the case relevant for Dijkgraaf-Witten
theories is discussed in their appendix.
115

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

In this algebraic framework the gauging of more complicated symmetries of arbitrary three-dimensional extended topological field theories can be addressed using
the cobordism hypothesis and representation theoretic techniques, see also [134]. A
detailed study of this would be interesting. However, we refrain from doing so in this
thesis and focus instead on a largely dimension-independent discussion.
The non-abelian group 2-cocycle describing the action of G on a Dijkgraaf-Witten
theory with gauge group D and topological action ω ∈ Z n (BD; U (1)) determines an
(not necessarily central) extension
ι
λ
b −→
1 −→ D −→ G
G −→ 1 .

(4.194)

The short exact sequence should be understood as a way to combine D- and G-gauge
b
b U (1)) such that ι∗ ω
fields into a single G-gauge
field. If there exists ω
b ∈ H n (B G;
b=ω
we say that the symmetry G is anomaly-free. In particular, the existence of ω
b ensures
that ω is preserved by the non-abelian 2-cocycle as we will now explain:
We define an n−1-cochain Φg on D as follows: Let χ : ∆n−1 −→ BD be an n−1b along ι. Putting gb on the interval we get a map
chain which we can include into B G
n−1
b
[0, 1] × ∆
−→ B G. Integration of the pullback of ω
b over [0, 1] × ∆n−1 gives the
inverse of the value of Φg evaluated on the n−1-simplex. The value of −δΦg on an
n-simplex (d1 , . . . , dn ) : ∆n −→ BD is given by
[b
g × (d1 , . . . , dn )]∗ ω
b , [0, 1] × ∂∆n
= [b
g × (d1 , . . . , dn )]∗ ω
b , ∂[0, 1] × ∆n − ∂([0, 1] × ∆n )
= [b
g × (d1 , . . . , dn )]∗ ω
b , ({1} − {0}) × ∆n
= α(g −1 )∗ ω(d1 , . . . , dn ) − ω(d1 , . . . , dn ) .
(4.195)
Hence the Φg provide a homotopy fixed point structure. In this case the equivariant
Dijkgraaf-Witten theory ZDW λωb 4.1.5 can be used to gauge the symmetry.
Theorem 4.196. Let ZDWω be a discrete gauge theory with topological action ω ∈
Z n (BD; U (1)) and kinematical G-symmetry described by an extension
ι
λ
b −→
1 −→ D −→ G
G −→ 1

(4.197)

b U (1)) satisfying ω = ι∗ ω
such that there exists ω
b ∈ Z n (B G;
b and the fixed point
structure is induced by ω
b . Then the G-equivariant Dijkgraaf-Witten theory
ZDW λωb : G-Cob −→ VectC
gauges this symmetry.
116

(4.198)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Proof. First we show that the trivial sector, i.e. the evaluation on trivial bundles, of
ZDW λωb is ZDWω . From the exact sequence of groups we get a fibration
ι
λ
b −→
BD −→ B G
BG

(4.199)

of classifying spaces. Let N be a manifold of dimension n or n − 1. We have to
evaluate the homotopy fibre λ−1
∗ [?] of the trivial bundle ? : N −→ BG. Using that
λ∗ is a fibration we can replace the homotopy fibre with the regular fibre Π1 [N, BD].
This shows that we can replace limits and integration over the homotopy fibre of the
trivial bundle with limits and integration over BunD (N ) for every manifold N . For
this reason (4.134) and (4.136) reduce the corresponding formulas for ZDWω , since ω
b
pulls back to ω.
Next we show that this gauges the symmetry, see (4.161):

(4.200)
ZDW λωb (Σ, g)f (ι∗ ϕD , id) = f ι∗ R(α(g −1 ))ϕD , id hϕ∗D Φg , σΣ i
for all closed n−1-dimensional manifolds Σ, f ( · ) ∈ ZDW λωb (Σ, ? : Σ −→ BG) and
ϕD : Σ −→ BD, where we interpret g ∈ G as a homotopy from the constant map ?
to itself. By [72, Proposition 4.2 (b)] we have
ZDW λωb (Σ, g)f (ι∗ ϕD , id) = f (ι∗ ϕD , g −1 ) .

(4.201)

We have to calculate a lift for the homotopy g −1 , i.e. a gauge transformation gb −1 : ι∗ ϕD −→
b
ι∗ ϕ0D such that λ(b
g −1 ) = g −1 . We use the concrete description of G-bundles
as
b ], where Π1 (Σ) is the fundamental
elements of the functor category [Π1 (Σ), ∗//G
groupoid of Σ. A lift of the gauge transformation is then given by conjugation with
b We calculate its action on the image d ∈ D ⊂ G
b of a path in Σ. The
(g −1 , 1) ∈ G.
inverse is given by [129]

g , σα (g, g −1 )−1 .
(4.202)
Then





g −1 , 1 1, d g , σα (g, g −1 )−1 = g −1 , α(g −1 )[d] g , σα (g, g −1 )−1
= 1 , α(g −1 )[d] α(g −1 )[σα (g, g −1 )−1 ] σα (g −1 , g)




= 1 , α(g −1 )[d] σα (g −1 , g)−1 σα (g −1 , g)

= 1, α(g −1 )[d] ,
(4.203)
where in the third equality we used σα (g −1 , g)−1 = α(g −1 )[σα (g, g −1 )−1 ], which follows from (4.167) with g1 = g −1 , g2 = g and g3 = g −1 using σα (1, g) = σα (g, 1) = 1

117

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

for all g ∈ G. This shows that ϕ0D = R(α(g −1 ))ϕD . That f ( · ) is a parallel section
implies

f (ι∗ ϕD , g −1 ) = Eωb−1 (Σ, gb)f R(α(g −1 ))ϕD , id .
(4.204)
By definition Eω−1 (Σ, gb) = hϕ∗D Φg , σΣ i with Φg induced by ω
b as above. Inserting this
into (4.204) gives (4.161) where Φg provide the homotopy fixed point structure.
Remark 4.205. Theorem 4.196 provides a general mechanism for the gauging of
symmetries. However, we cannot show that it is impossible to gauge the symmetry
when the conditions of Theorem 4.196 are not satisfied, i.e. when no such ω
b exists.
Also the homotopy fixed point structure which is gauge by this construction is induced
by ω
b . It is not clear to us whether all homotopy fixed point structures arise in this
way. In general, we expect this not to be the case.
Example 4.206. We describe a discrete two-dimensional gauge theory with gauge
group D = ZN × ZN and topological action ωk ∈ H 2 (ZN × ZN ; U (1)) as defined
in (4.121). The action of the symmetry group G on D can be encoded in a short
exact sequence
b −→ G −→ 1 .
1 −→ D −→ G

(4.207)

Set G = ZM × ZM and consider the extension
(M,M ) ·

(0, 0) −→ ZN × ZN −−−−→ ZN M × ZN M −→ ZM × ZM −→ (0, 0) .

(4.208)

In this case we can gauge the symmetry in the manner of Theorem 4.196 for the
topological action ωk with k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , N − 1} if and only if k is divisible by
M modulo N , i.e. there exists k 0 ∈ Z such that k 0 M = k mod N . Concretely,
ω
b ∈ H 2 (ZN M × ZN M ; U (1)) is given by ωk0 ∈ Z 2 (ZN M × ZN M ; U (1)). This simple
example already shows that we cannot gauge every symmetry using Theorem 4.196; it
is discussed in [126, 139] in the context of 0-form and 1-form global symmetries. We
will discuss obstructions to finding an appropriate lift ω
b in more detail and generality
in Section 4.2.4.
Example 4.209. The cyclic group Z2 acts on the dihedral group D8 by conjugation
with the generator a. Since this is an action via inner automorphisms it preserves the
non-trivial 2-cocycle ω ∈ H 2 (BD8 ; U (1)) from Example 4.120.b. This action defines
a non-abelian 2-cocycle with trivial map σ. The corresponding extension is
1 −→ D8 −→ D8 o Z2 −→ Z2 −→ 1 .

(4.210)

The Pauli group is the subgroup
P1 = {± 12 , ± i 12 , ± σx , ± i σx , ± σy , ± i σy , ± σz , ± i σz }

118

(4.211)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

of the unitary group U (2) with the Pauli spin matrices






0 1
0 −i
1 0
σx =
, σy =
and
σz =
.
1 0
i
0
0 −1

(4.212)

There is an equivalence of extensions
D8 o Z 2
1

D8

ϑ

Z2

1

(4.213)

P1
given by ϑ(ai bj , k) = ( i σx )i σyj σxk , showing that this extension is non-trivial even
though it comes from an inner automorphism. The intuitive reason for this is that
conjugation by a2 is the identity even though a2 itself is not. We will show in Example 4.248 that this symmetry cannot be gauged in the manner of Theorem 4.196.
Example 4.214. In three dimensions we can look at the extension
M·

0 −→ ZN −−→ ZN M −→ ZM −→ 0 .

(4.215)

The 3-cocycle ωk defined in (4.125) can always be gauged by the 3-cocycle ω
bk ∈
H 3 (BZN M ; U (1)) corresponding to the same value of k.

4.2.4

Obstructions to gauging

We start by recalling some basic definitions related to spectral sequences focusing
on first quadrant spectral sequences for simplicity. A spectral sequence is a tool for
the computation of (co)homology groups. They usually arise in contexts where the
homology groups of different chain complexes are related, e.g. for a topological fibre
bundle F −→ E −→ B there exists a spectral sequence relating the cohomology of
B and F to the cohomology E.
Definition 4.216 (See e.g. Definition 5.2.3 of [121]). A (cohomological) spectral
sequence (starting at E2 ) consists of a family of abelian groups6 {Erp,q } for all integers
p, q ∈ Z and r ≥ 2 together with differentials
p,q
p+r,q−r+1
dp,q
r : Er −→ Er

(4.217)

p,q ∼
p−r,q+r−1
and isomorphisms Er+1
).
= ker(dp,q
r )/ im(dr
A first quadrant spectral sequence is a spectral sequence which satisfies Erp,q = 0
for p < 0 and or q < 0.
6

More generally, one can define a spectral sequence with values in an arbitrary abelian category.

119

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

The collection of all terms for a fixed value of r is called the Er -page of the
spectral sequence. For example the E2 -page of a general first quadrant spectral
sequence looks as follows
..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

..

2

E20,2

E21,2

E22,2

E23,2

...

1

E20,1

E21,1

E22,1

E23,1

...

0

E20,0

E21,0

E22,0

E23,0

...

0

1

2

3

.

where we have only drawn two differentials.
For a first quadrant spectral sequence (Erp,q , dp,q
r ) and fixed p, q there exists an
r0 ∈ N such that for all r ≥ r0 we have q − r + 1 < 0 and p − r < 0 implying
p,q
p,q
p,q
p−r,q+r−1
∼
ker(dp,q
) = 0 and hence Erp,q
= Er0 +1 ∼
= Er0 +2 ∼
= . . . . We set
r ) = Er , im(dr
0
p,q
∼
E∞ = limr≥r0 Er = Er0 .
Definition 4.218. Let {H n }n≥0 be a family of abelian groups. We say a first quadn
rant spectral sequence (Erp,q , dp,q
r ) converges to H if there are filtrations
0 = F n+1 H n ⊂ F n H n ⊂ · · · ⊂ F 0 H n = H n

(4.219)

pq ∼
for n ≥ 0 and isomorphisms E∞
= F p H p+q /F p+1 H p+q . For a convergent spectral
sequence we write

E2p,q =⇒ H p+q .

(4.220)

Example 4.221. Let f : E −→ B be a Serre fibration with fibre F . There is a
convergent spectral sequence of cohomology group [121, Section 5.3].
E2p,q = H p (B; H q (F )) =⇒ H p+q (E) .

(4.222)

Remark 4.223. Let E2p,q =⇒ H p,q be a convergent spectral sequence of vector space.
The splitting of every exact sequence of vector spaces implies
M
p,q
Hn ∼
E∞
.
(4.224)
=
p+q=n

In general the spectral sequence determines H n only up to the solution of iterated
extensions problems.
120

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Let E2p,q =⇒ H p+q be a convergent first quadrant spectral sequence. The terms
and Ern,0 are called edge terms. Note that all differentials reaching Er0,n are
0,n
zero implying E∞
⊂ · · · ⊂ Er0,n ⊂ · · · ⊂ E20,n . We get induced edge maps H n −→
n,0
0,n
H n /F 1 H n ∼
−→ E20,n . Dually, all the differentials dn,0
are zero and hence Er+1
= E∞
r
n,0
= F nH n ⊂ H n.
is a quotient of Ern,0 and there are natural edge maps E2n,0 −→ E∞
After this brief introduction to spectral sequences we can apply them to the
problem at hand. In this section we work with the group cohomology H n (G; U (1))
instead of the cohomology of BG with coefficients in U (1). Let

Er0,n

ι
λ
b −→
1 −→ D −→ G
G −→ 1

(4.225)

be an exact sequence of finite groups and ω an n-cocycle on D. For the application
b is required. There are
of Theorem 4.196 the existence of an n-coclycle ω
b on G
7
obstructions for ω
b to exist: there is an action of G on H n (D; U (1)) induced by
b Every cocycle on G
b is invariant under conjugation and hence the
conjugation in G.
first obstruction for ω
b to exist is
G
ω ∈ H n D; U (1) .
(4.226)
By definition, the obstruction is always satisfied if the extension corresponds to a
kinematical symmetry. There are further obstructions encoded by first quadrant
Lyndon-Hochschild-Serre spectral sequence corresponding to the exact sequence of
groups (4.194) which takes the form


b U (1)
E2p,q = H p G; H q (D; U (1)) =⇒ H p+q G;
(4.227)
0,n
b U (1))  E 0,n = En+2
with edge maps H n (G;
,→ H n (D; U (1))G given by the restric∞
0,n
tion to D (see e.g. [121, Section 6.8]). Hence, we see that ω ∈ im(ι∗ ) = En+2
if and
only if
i,n+1−i
d0,n
i ω = 0 ∈ Ei

(4.228)

0,n
for all i ∈ {2, . . . , n + 1}. Note that d 0,n
i ω is onlywell-defined if d i−1 ω = 0 and
Eii,n+1−i is a sub-quotient of H i G; H n+1−i (D; U (1)) .
To understand these obstructions in more detail we introduce the algebraic model
b can be comfor the spectral sequence [141, Section 2]. The group cohomology of G
b U (1)):
puted from the normalised cochain complex C • (G;


b U (1) −→ C 1 G;
b U (1) −→ · · · .
0 −→ C 0 G;
(4.229)

We introduce a filtration




b U (1) = F 0 C • G;
b U (1) ⊇ F 1 C • G;
b U (1) ⊇ F 2 C • G;
b U (1) ⊇ · · · (4.230)
C • G;
7

For a physical perspective on these obstructions and the corresponding spectral sequence,
see [140].

121

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

b U (1)) is 0 for i > n and otherwise consists of all normalized nwhere F i C n (G;
cochains which are 0 as soon as n − i + 1 entries are in the image of D. This filtration
is compatible with the coboundary operator δ and hence induces a spectral sequence,
which is the Lyndon-Hochschild-Serre spectral sequence. Concretely we set

 δ


b U (1) −→
b U (1) F p+r C p+q+1 G;
b U (1) ,
Zrp,q := ker F p C p+q G;
C p+q+1 G;
(4.231)



b U (1) ∩ F p C p+q G;
b U (1) ,
Brp,q := δ F p−r+1 C p+q−1 G;
Erp,q := Zrp,q




p+1,q−1
Brp,q + Zr−1
.

(4.232)
(4.233)

b U (1)) −→ C (p+r)+(q−r+1) (G;
b U (1)) induces the correThe differential δ : C p+q (G;
sponding differentials
p+r,q−r+1
p,q
d p,q
r : Er −→ Er

(4.234)

in the spectral sequence.
We consider the two-dimensional case as a warm-up. We fix ω ∈ H 2 (D; U (1)).
The corresponding element in E20,2 is the 2-cochain
b×G
b −→ U (1)
ω̃ : G
(4.235)
0

0


(d, g) , (d , g ) 7−→ ω(d, d0 ) .
b is twisted by the
This is not a cocycle in general since the multiplication in G
corresponding non-abelian 2-cocycle. This cochain obviously pulls back to ω. The
b which is 0
ensuing calculation can be understood as trying to find a 2-cochain on G
when pulled back to D such that its sum with ω̃ is closed.
2,1
3,0
The first obstruction d 0,2
2 ω̃ = 0 is equivalent to δ ω̃ ∈ B2 + Z1 . This implies
b U (1)) such that
that there exists γ1 ∈ F 1 C 2 (G;

b U (1)
δγ1 ∈ F 2 C 3 G;
and
δ(ω̃ − γ1 ) ∈ Z13,0 .
(4.236)
0,2
This means that we can consider ω̃ as an element of E30,2 ∼
= ker d 2 . Note that the
identification is not the identity, rather we have to map ω̃ to ω̃ − γ1 . We have thus
shown that if the first obstruction vanishes, then there exists θ ∈ Z13,0 = Z 3 (G; U (1))
and a cochain ω 0 = ω̃ − γ1 such that δω 0 = λ∗ θ and ι∗ ω 0 = ω.
3,0
The next obstruction is d 0,2
3 ω̃ = 0. This is equivalent to δ(ω̃ − γ1 ) ∈ B3 , hence
b U (1)) such that δγ2 = δ(ω̃ − γ1 ) ∈ F 3 C 2 (G;
b U (1)). This
there exists γ2 ∈ F 1 C 2 (G;
∗
implies δ(ω̃ − γ1 − γ2 ) = 0 and ι (ω̃ − γ1 − γ2 ) = ω since γ1 and γ2 are elements in
b U (1)). This gives the desired 2-cocycle ω
F 1 C 2 (G;
b = ω̃ − γ1 − γ2 .

122

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

The discussion above readily generalises to arbitrary dimension n. If the first
b U (1)) such that
obstruction vanishes then there exists γ1 ∈ F 1 C n (G;

b U (1) .
δ(ω̃ − γ1 ) ∈ F 3 C n+1 G;
(4.237)
More generally if the first m ≤ n obstructions vanish, there are elements γ1 , . . . , γm ∈
b U (1)) such that
F 1 C n (G;

b U (1) ,
δγi ∈ F i C n+1 G;
(4.238)


δ ω̃ −

k
X

γi




b U (1) ,
∈ F k+2 C n+1 G;

(4.239)

i=1

for all i, k = 1, . . . , m. In particular, if all obstructions vanish then


n
X



γi = 0

(4.240)



γi = ω ∈ H n D; U (1) .

(4.241)

δ ω̃ −

i=1

and
∗



ι ω̃ −

n
X
i=1

We are mostly interested in the case when all obstructions except the last one vanish.
In this case


δ ω̃ −

n−1
X


γi = λ∗ θ

(4.242)

i=1

b U (1)) are in onewith θ ∈ Z n+1 (G; U (1)), since closed elements of F n+1 C n+1 (G;
n+1
to-one correspondence with Z (G; U (1)). We summarize the present discussion
in
Proposition 4.243. Let
ι

λ

b −→ G −→ 1
1 −→ D −→ G

(4.244)

be a short exact sequence of groups, n a natural number and ω an n-cocycle on D
with values in U (1).
b U (1))
(a) When all obstructions in (4.228) vanish, then there exists ω
b ∈ Z n (G;
∗
satisfying ι ω
b = ω.
(b) When the first n − 1 obstructions in (4.228) vanish, then there exist ω 0 ∈
b U (1)) and θ ∈ Z n+1 (G; U (1)) satisfying ι∗ ω 0 = ω and δω 0 = λ∗ θ.
C n (G;
123

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Remark 4.245. If the first n − 1 obstructions vanish we can realize the anomalous
field theory as a boundary state of a classical n+1-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten
theory with topological action θ. In Section 4.3 we will explain this point in more
detail.
Example 4.246. We have seen in Example 4.214 that for the extension
0 −→ ZN −→ ZN M −→ ZM −→ 0

(4.247)

all 3-cocycles on ZN arise as pullbacks of 3-cocycles on ZN M , hence all obstructions
vanish in this case. The E2 -page of the corresponding spectral sequence is
..
.

..
.

..
.

..
.

...

3

ZM

Zgcf(M,N )

Zgcf(M,N )

Zgcf(M,N )

...

2

0

0

0

0

...

1

Zm

Zgcf(M,N )

Zgcf(M,N )

Zgcf(M,N )

...

0

U (1)

ZN

0

ZN

...

0

1

2

3

where gcf(M, N ) is the greatest common factor of M and N . For gcf(M, N ) = 1
this implies directly that all obstruction vanish. To conclude the existence of ω
e for
gcf(M, N ) > 1 from the spectral sequence a more detailed analysis is needed.
Example 4.248. Following up on Example 4.209 we show that for the symmetry
described by
1 −→ D8 −→ P1 −→ Z2 −→ 1

(4.249)

the non-trivial 2-cocycle ω ∈ H 2 (D8 ; U (1)) cannot be gauged. The cohomology groups
of the Pauli group P1 can be computed using a computer algebra package such as
GAP [142] and the universal coefficient theorem to get

H 0 P1 ; U (1) = U (1) ,

H 1 P1 ; U (1) = Z2 × Z2 × Z2 ,
(4.250)
2


H P1 ; U (1) = Z2 × Z2 ,

H 3 P1 ; U (1) = Z2 × Z2 × Z8 .
124

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

The E2 page of the corresponding spectral sequence is

2

Z2

Z2

Z2

Z2

1

Z2 × Z2

Z2 × Z2

Z2 × Z2

Z2 × Z2

0

U (1)

Z2

0

Z2

0

1

2

3

The two differentials drawn are 0 as can be checked by using the concrete description
of the differentials in [143] and the fact that (4.249) is the extension of Z2 by D8
corresponding to the inner automorphism of D8 given by conjugation with a ∈ D8 .
Hence the E3 page is given by

2

Z2

1

Z2 × Z2

Z2 × Z2

0

U (1)

Z2

0

Z2

0

1

2

3

1,1
From E31,1 = Z2 × Z2 = E∞
and H 2 (P1 ; U (1)) = Z2 × Z2 we deduce that the differential d 0,2
3 : Z2 −→ Z2 is an isomorphism. This implies that the symmetry corresponding to (4.249) of the non-trivial topological action ω ∈ H 2 (D8 ; U (1)) cannot be
gauged using Theorem 4.196, since the second obstruction corresponding to d 0,2
3 does
not vanish. However, since the first obstruction vanishes we can gauge the symmetry
using the relative field theory constructed in Section 4.3.

Example 4.251. We have seen in Example 4.206 that for the extension
(0, 0) −→ Z2 × Z2 −→ Z4 × Z4 −→ Z2 × Z2 −→ (0, 0)

125

(4.252)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

the 2-cocycle ω1 ∈ H 2 (Z2 ×Z2 ; U (1)) cannot be obtained as the pullback of a 2-cocycle
on Z4 × Z4 . The corresponding 2-cochain is given by
ω̃1 : (Z4 × Z4 )2 −→ U (1)




(a1 , b1 ) , (a2 , b2 ) 7−→ exp π i

j a k j b k
1

2

(4.253)

2

.
2
 a+b 

   
To find the corresponding obstructions we calculate using 2 = a b + a2 + 2b
mod 2 to get


jb k ja k


3
1
δ ω̃1 (a1 , b1 ) , (a2 , b2 ) , (a3 , b3 ) = exp π i a1 a2
+
b2 b3
. (4.254)
2
2
Using the computer algebra program Maple we verified by checking all possibilities
that there are no solutions to the equation
δ(ω̃1 − γ1 ) = λ∗ θ

(4.255)

with γ1 ∈ F 1 C 2 (Z4 ×Z4 ; U (1)) and θ ∈ Z 3 (Z2 ×Z2 ; U (1)). Hence the first obstruction
d 0,2
2 ω1 does not vanish.

4.2.5

Fully extended TQFT’s and defects

We conclude with a few general remarks on different interpretations of the obstructions discussed in the previous section. This part will be informal and conjectural.
In particular, we will use ∞-categories in an intuitive way without choosing a model
or giving any details.
In an extended field theory manifolds with boundaries can be decomposed into
manifolds with corners, but we cannot decompose complicated n − 2-dimensional
manifolds into simpler pieces. For this and other reasons it is desirable to include
manifolds with corners of arbitrary codimension. This leads to the introduction of an
n-category of n-dimensional cobordisms with structure. Defining these n-categories
is a notoriously hard problem, which to the best of our knowledge has only been
solved in the case of manifolds with a particular type of topological structures, called
G-structures, using (∞, n)-categories [53, 54].
Definition 4.256. Let G be a Lie group equipped with a smooth group homomorphism G −→ GL(n) and M an n-dimensional manifold. A G-structure on M is a
lift up to homotopy
BG
(4.257)
M

τM

BGL(n)

of the map τM classifying the frame bundle of M .
126

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

In more geometric terms a G-structure is a reduction of the structure group of the
frame bundle to G. However, the homotopy theoretical description is important to
define morphisms of G-structures in a way suitable for the application to topological
field theories.8
Example 4.258.
• For G = ∗ the definition of a G-structure on M reduces
to the definition of a framing of M , i.e. the choice of a trivialisation of the
tangent bundle. Framed manifolds play a central role in the classification of
fully extended topological field theories as we will explain below.
• For G = SO(n) considered as a subgroup of GL(n) a G-structure corresponds
to the choice of an orientation. A geometric inclined reader would probably
have expected an SO(n)-structure to also involve the choice of a metric. This
is not the case, because of the homotopical definition of morphisms between
G-structures.
• Let D be a finite group, G = D × SO(n) and ρ : D × SO(n) −→ SO(n) −→
Gl(n) the composition of the projection onto SO(n) composed with the inclusion of SO(n) into Gl(n) and M an n-dimensional manifold. To describe
G-structures we note that B(D × SO(n)) ∼
= BD × BSO(n) and hence a Gstructure can be described by a pair of continuous maps ψD : M −→ BD and
ψSO(n) : M −→ BSO(n) together with a homotopy filling the diagram
BSO(n)
ψSO(n)

M

τM

(4.259)
BGL(n)

In summary a G-structure on M consists of a principal D-bundle with classifying map ψD and an orientation. D × SO(n)-structures are a topological way
of describing the background fields considered in this chapter.
In [54] a symmetric monoidal (∞, n)-category Cob∞
G,n of cobordisms equipped
with G-structures is constructed based on a proposal by Lurie [53]. We will write
∞
D-Cob∞
n for CobD×SO(n),n . Let C be a symmetric monoidal (∞, n)-category. A fully
extended topological field theory with values in C is a symmetric monoidal functor
Z : Cob∞
G,n −→ C .

(4.260)

There exist a conjectural classification of fully extended field theories, called the
cobordism hypothesis going back to the work of [144]. Lurie has given a detailed
sketch of a proof [53]. There is another proposal for a proof using factorization
homology due to Ayala and Francis [145]. According to the cobordism hypothesis
fully extended framed topological field theories Cob∞
∗,n −→ C are classified by the
f.d.
(∞, 0)-category (space) C
of fully dualizable objects in C. The precise definition
8

Actually, manifolds with G-structure form an ∞-category, see e.g. [54] for details.

127

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

will not play any importance in what follows and hence we refer the reader to [53]
for a definition (see also [146, III.5] for an informal discussion).
Let G be a group equipped with a group homomorphism G −→ Gl(n). This
induces an action of G on Cob∞
∗,n via rotation of the framing, which induces an action
of G on the space of framed topological field theories Cf.d. . The coboridms hypothesis
conjectures that fully extended topological field theories Cob∞
G,n −→ C are classified
f.d.,G
by the space C
of homotopy fixed points of this action [53].
Definition 4.261. Let X be a topological space with right G-action. A homotopy
fixed point of the G-action is a G-equivariant map EG −→ X.
A corollary of the cobordism hypothesis is a classification of fully extended equivariant field theories
Z : D-Cob∞
n −→ C .

(4.262)

Theorem 4.263. Assuming that the cobordism hypothesis is true the following holds:
the (∞, 0)-category of D-equivariant fully extended field theories is equivalent to the
(∞, 0)-category of fully extended oriented topological field theories with D action.
Proof. The cobordism hypothesis implies that the space of D-equivariant fully extended field theories is HomD×SO(n) (ED × ESO(n), Cf.d. ). Via adjunction this space
can be described as HomD (ED, HomSO(n) (ESO(n), Cf.d. )). Again using the cobordism hypothesis the space HomSO(n) (ESO(n), Cf.d. ) is the space of oriented fully
extended topological field theories. We recall from Example 4.258 that the D action
on the framing is trivial. In this case an equivariant map is the same as a continuous
map BD = ED/D −→ HomSO(n) (ESO(n), Cf.d. ), i.e. an oriented field theory with
D-action.
Example 4.264. One-dimensional oriented topological field theories with values in
vector spaces are classified by finite-dimensional vector spaces. Theorem 4.263 implies now that 1-dimensional D-equivariant topological field theories are classified by
finite dimensional representations of D. This approach should also be helpful to study
fully extended topological field theories in higher dimensions. In 2-dimensions one
would reproduce the results of [147]. Furthermore, Theorem 4.263 relates the results
from [138] directly to equivariant field theories. We hope to develop this approach to
the classification of equivariant topological field theories in more detail in the future.
Theorem 4.263 provides a different point of view on the absence of ’t Hooft
anomalies, since it implies that any symmetry which can be extended to the point
can be gauged in a canonical way. Dijkgraaf-Witten theories are believed to be
fully extended, see [115] for arguments into this direction. This makes the following
interpretation of the n + 1 obstructions from Section 4.2.4 natural: the first obstruction correspondence to extending the symmetry from the partition function to the
state space. Indeed, recall from Proposition 4.154 that a homotopy coherent action
128

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

α : BG −→ BAut(D)//D satisfying [α(g)∗ ω] = [ω] can be extended to the state space
if there are Φg ∈ C n−1 (G; U (1)) such that δΦg = ω − α(g −1 )∗ ω and
Φg1 + α(g1−1 )∗ Φg2 = Φg1 g2 + σg1 ,g2 [ω] ,

(4.265)

up to coboundary terms. To see whether this equation admits a solution we pick a
collection of Φ0g satisfying the first condition9 and consider the 2-cocycle
U (g1 , g2 ) := Φ0g−1 + α(g1 )∗ Φ0g−1 − Φ0(g1 g2 )−1 + σg1−1 ,g2−1 [ω]
1

(4.266)

2

on G with values in H n−1 (D; U (1)). If this 2-cocycle is trivial in cohomology we can
chose Φg satisfying Equation (4.265). In [138, Section 11.8.1] it is explained that this
2
n−1
2-cocycle is the differential d0,n
(D; U (1))) for n = 3. We expect this
2 ω ∈ H (G; H
relation to hold for arbitrary n. Summarizing the discussion we have seen that the
structure ensuring that we can extend the symmetry to the state space exists if and
only if the first obstruction from the spectral sequence vanishes.
We conjecture that this correspondence continues, i.e. that the vanishing of the
second obstruction in the spectral sequence allows us to extend the symmetry to the
extended Dijkgraaf-Witten from Section 4.1.4, the third obstruction to the extension
of a symmetry for the twice extended Dijkgraaf-Witten theory, and so on. Furthermore, we expect this to be related to equipping the cocycle ω with higher homotopy
fixed point structures analogues to Definition 4.151.
We now sketch an interpretation of ’t Hooft anomalies in terms of defects. Defects can be considered as extended observables, consisting of a submanifold of the
spacetime manifold together with a “label” specifying the type of defect. In general defects can meet on lower dimensional submanifolds. Defect networks can be
described by labelled stratified manifolds, see Figure 4.4 for an example. There are
versions of the cobordism category CobF
n including defects [148]. Every quantum
field theory admits a trivial defect 1 which does not change the partition function.
A defect is called topological if its expectation value is invariant under isotopies
of the defect network. For topological defects there is a “fusion operation” which
corresponds to bringing two defects close together. A topological defect D is called
invertible if there exists a defect D−1 such that their fusion product D ⊗ D−1 is
the trivial defect. The symmetries of a quantum field theory, are closely related to
the invertible codimension one topological defects in the theory: for every symmetry
there should be a corresponding invertible topological defect which acts on a field
passing through the defect by applying the symmetry (See Figure 4.5 for a sketch).
For more details on this approach we refer to [149] and for an application of defects
to the description of symmetries of 2-dimensional Yang-Mills theory to [150]. It is
believed that (topological) defects of n-dimensional field theories assemble into an
n-category with objects n-dimensional quantum field theories, 1-morphisms domain
walls (codimension 1 defects) between quantum field theories, 2-morphisms codimension 2 defects between domain walls and so on up to n-morphisms which are given by
9

This is possible because α preserves the cohomology class of ω.

129

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Figure 4.4: Sketch of a defect network on the 2-dimensional torus with two codimension one defects in blue and red and two point defects in black and green. The green
point defect is between the trivial defect 1, which we have not drawn, and the blue
defect
point defects. This believe has been made prices in 2 and 3 dimensional topological
field theories [151, 152].

Ψ

←→

ϕ·Ψ

Figure 4.5: A defect corresponding to the symmetry ϕ, indicated by the directed lines. A
field insertion Ψ moving through the defect corresponds to the action of ϕ on Ψ.

In the context of state sum models for 2-dimensional topological field theories
the defect bicategory B has the following algebraic description [151, 153]:
• Objects: The objects of B are separable symmetric Frobenius algebras.
• 1-Morphisms: Let A and B be separable symmetric Frobenius-algebras. A
1-morphism M : A −→ B is a finite dimensional A, B-bimodule. Composition
is given by the relative tensor product of bimodules.
• 2-Morphisms: The 2-morphisms in B are given by bimodule maps.
We now relate the discussion of ’t Hooft anomalies presented above specialised
to 2-dimensions to topological defects. Let D be a finite group and ω ∈ Z 2 (D; U (1))
a D 2-cocycle with values in U (1). The separable symmetric Frobenius algebra
describing the corresponding 2-dimensional Dijkgraaf-Witten theory is the twisted
group algebra C[D]ω with basis {δd }d∈D and multiplication
δd · δd0 := ω(d, d0 )δd·d0 .
130

(4.267)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

A gauge transformation corresponding to an element d ∈ D acts on this algebra via
δd0 7−→ θd (d0 )δdd0 d−1 ,

(4.268)

where θd = ω(d, d(−)d−1 ) · ω(−, d)−1 is the canonical 1-chain satisfying δθd =
ω(−, −) − ω(d(−)d−1 , d(−)d−1 ). This is nothing else than the algebraic description of the singular 1-chain constructed by crossing with an interval labelled by d
similar to the construction before Theorem 4.196 to the algebraic setting.
Let G be a finite group and α : ∗//G −→ Aut(D)//D a non-abelian 2-cocycle such
that [α(g)∗ ω] = [ω]. Every choice of Φg ∈ C 1 (D; U (1)) such that δΦg = ω −α(g −1 )∗ ω
induces an automorphism
ϕg : C[D]ω −→ C[D]ω
(4.269)
δd 7−→ Φg (d)δα(g−1 )(d)
of C[D]ω implementing the symmetry. Every automorphism of C[D]ω induces an
invertible bimodule with C[D]ω as underlying vector space and action given by
ϕg ⊗id ⊗ id

C[D]ω ⊗ C[D]ω ⊗ C[D]ω −−−−−−→ C[D]ω ⊗ C[D]ω ⊗ C[D]ω −→ C[D]ω ,

(4.270)

where the last arrow is the multiplication in C[D]ω . We denote this bimodule by
C[D]ωϕg . This invertible defect implements the symmetry corresponding to an element
g ∈ G and the non-abelian 2-cocycle α. The relative tensor product C[D]ωϕg2 ⊗C[D]ω
C[D]ωϕg1 can be identified with the bimodule corresponding to the automorphism
α(g2 g1 )−1 of D and the 1-chain Ψ = α(g1−1 )∗ Ψg2 + Ψg1 . Note that in general Ψ
differs from Ψg2 g1 . To implement the composition law described by the non-abelian
2-cocycle α, the terms should agree up to a gauge transformation by the element
α(g2 , g1 ) ∈ D. Concretely, this implies that we need to choose the Ψg such that
α(g1−1 )∗ Ψg2 + Ψg1 = Ψg2 ,g1 + θα(g2 ,g1 )

(4.271)

holds. As explained above this equation only admits a solution if the first obstruction
in the spectral sequence vanishes. In this situation we can implement the action of
G via a homotopy coherent action in the defect bicategory B.
To gauge a symmetry realized by a homotopy coherent G action in B one needs
to construct so called orbifold data from the defects [148, 154]. This is in general
not possible and the obstruction is an element in H 3 (G; U (1)). For Dijkgraaf-Witten
theories we expect this cocycle to agree with the obstruction coming from the spectral
sequence. In case all obstruction vanish we can gauge the theory by introducing
defect networks implementing the G-bundle as for example in [150, Section 2.2] and
computing the partition function for this defect network. The result should agree
with the one derived from the push construction. This is a discrete analogue of the
constructions in [150].
131

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

4.3

Anomalous Dijkgraaf-Witten theories as boundary states

Let ZDWω : Cob −→ VectC be a topological gauge theory with gauge group D, topological action ω ∈ Z n−1 (D; U (1)) and a kinematic symmetry described by an exact
sequence of finite groups
ι

λ

b −→ G −→ 1 .
1 −→ D −→ G

(4.272)

Assume that we are in the situation of Proposition 4.243(b), i.e. that there exists ω 0 ∈
b U (1)) and θ ∈ Z n (G; U (1)) such that ι∗ ω 0 = ω and δω 0 = λ∗ θ. In this section
C n−1 (G;
we explicitly construct the gauged theory as a relative field theory Zω0 : 1 =⇒ tr Eθ .
In more physical terms we realise the anomalous field theory as the boundary state
of a symmetry protected topological phase described by θ. We start by constructing
the theory at the level of partition functions in Section 4.3.1. This construction is
similar to the one in [155, Section 3.3]. However, we use the language of functorial
field theories and homotopy fibres to describe the construction. The way boundary
field theories appear here is to some extent reversed to the way they appear in
[155], where anomalous boundary field theories are constructed starting from a bulk
Dijkgraaf-Witten theory. Instead we start from a field theory with anomaly and
show how to realize this theory as a boundary field theory.
Afterwards, we construct the theory at the level of state spaces in Section 4.3.2
using a general pushforward construction for relative field theories.

4.3.1

Partition function

In this section we construct a natural transformation Zω0 : 1 =⇒ tr Eθ (see Definition 2.69) of non-extended field theories.
Following the general theory outlined in Section 2 we have to specify an element
Zω0 (Σ, ϕ : M −→ BG) of Eθ (Σ, ϕ) for all objects (Σ, ϕ) ∈ G-Cob. Let σΣ be a
representative for the fundamental class of Σ. We set

Z
∗ 0
∗
Zω0 (Σ, ϕ) =
hϕ
b ω , σΣ i hh θ, [0, 1] × σΣ i [σΣ ] ∈ Eθ (Σ, ϕ) . (4.273)
−1
(ϕ,h)∈λ
b
∗ [ϕ]

Proposition 4.274. Zω0 is a partition function with anomaly Eθ : G-Cob −→ VectC
(see Definition 2.69).
Proof. We have to show that Zω0 is a well-defined natural transformation. This is
an immediate consequence of the construction in Section 4.3.2. To get a feeling on
how to work concretely with the constructions involved, we present here a part of
the proof. We start by showing that hϕ
b ∗ ω 0 , σΣ i hh∗ θ, [0, 1] × σΣ i is well-defined on
b b1 , h1 ) −→ (ϕ
isomorphism classes of λ−1
b2 , h2 ) be a morphism in λ−1
∗ [ϕ]. Let h : (ϕ
∗ [ϕ],

132

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

i.e. a homotopy b
h: ϕ
b1 −→ ϕ
b2 such that the diagram
λ∗ b
h

λ∗ ϕ
b1

λ∗ ϕ
b2
(4.275)

h1

h2

ϕ
commutes. The homotopy induces a chain homotopy H : ϕ
b1∗ −→ ϕ
b2∗ between the
induced maps on singular chains given by H(c) = b
h∗ ([0, 1] × c) for all chains c ∈
C• (Σ). Hence, writing U (1) = R/Z additively for the calculation, we find
b1∗ ω 0 , σΣ = ω 0 , ∂H(σΣ ) − H(∂σΣ )
ϕ
b2∗ ω 0 , σΣ − ϕ
= ω 0 , ∂H(σΣ )i
(4.276)
= b
h∗ λ∗ θ, [0, 1] × σΣ
= h∗1 θ − h∗2 θ, [0, 1] × σΣ .
This shows that the integration in (4.273) is well-defined.
Let σΣ0 be a different representative for the fundamental class of Σ and χ an nchain satisfying ∂χ = σΣ0 − σΣ . To show that (4.273) is an element of Eθ (Σ, ϕ) we
calculate
hϕ
b ∗ ω 0 , σΣ0 − σΣ i hh∗ θ, [0, 1] × (σΣ0 − σΣ )i = hϕ
b ∗ ω 0 , ∂χi hh∗ θ, [0, 1] × ∂χi
= hϕ
b ∗ λ∗ θ, χi hh∗ θ, −{0} × χ + {1} × χi
= hϕ∗ θ, χi .
(4.277)
This is exactly the required transformation behaviour. We leave the verification of
naturality to the reader.
Remark 4.278. Before extending the field theory we give the precise form of the
composite partition function (2.108). We fix an n-dimensional manifold M with
boundary ∂M = −Σ and a principal G-bundle ψ : M −→ BG. Evaluating Eθ on
(M, ψ) gives a linear map Eθ (M, ψ) : Eθ (Σ, ψ|Σ ) −→ C. The composite partition
function is then
Zω0 bb (M, ψ, Σ) = Eθ (M, ψ)[Zω0 (Σ, ψ|Σ )]
=

Z
−1
(ϕ,h)∈λ
b
∗ [ψ|Σ ]


hϕ
b ∗ ω 0 , ∂σM i−1 hh∗ θ, [0, 1] × ∂σM i−1 hψ ∗ θ, σM i ,
(4.279)

which is gauge-invariant according to the general theory outlined in Section 2.2.3.
133

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

4.3.2

State space from a pushforward construction for relative field theories

In this section we extend Zω0 to an anomalous field theory Zω0 : 1 =⇒ tr Eθ using
a general pushforward construction for relative field theories. This construction
b −→ G be a group
seems to be new to the best of our knowledge.10 Let λ : G
b
homomorphism between finite groups and λ : G-Cob
n,n−1,n−2 −→ G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 the
induced functor between bicategories. Furthermore, let Z1 , Z2 : G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→
2VectC be extended functorial field theories and Z : tr λ∗ Z1 =⇒ tr λ∗ Z2 a relative
field theory. The relative pushforward construction produces a relative field theory
λ∗ Z : tr Z1 −→ tr Z2 .
Let (S, ξ : S −→ BG) be an object of G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 . Recall that the homotopy
b h : λξb −→ ξ) as objects. From Z we construct
fibre λ−1 [ξ] has pairs (ξb: S −→ B G,
a diagram
b ξ) : λ−1 [ξ] −→ [Z1 (S, ξ), Z2 (S, ξ)]
Z(S,
b h) 7−→
(ξ,



b
Z1 (h−1 )
Z(S,ξ)
Z2 (h)
∗
∗
b
b
Z1 (S, ξ) −−−−→ λ Z1 (S, ξ) −−−→ λ Z2 (S, ξ) −−−→ Z2 (S, ξ)
(4.280)

in the functor category [Z1 (S, ξ), Z2 (S, ξ)]. Concretely, the action on a morphism
b
b h) −→ (ξb0 , h0 ) is
h : (ξ,
Z1 (h−1 )

Z1 (S, ξ)

0 −1

Z1 (h

b
λ∗ Z1 (S, ξ)
λ∗ Z1 (b
h)

)

λ∗ Z1 (S, ξb0 )

b
Z(S,ξ)

b
λ∗ Z2 (S, ξ)

Z(b
h)

Z2 (h)

λ∗ Z2 (b
h)

Z(S,ξb0 )

Z2 (S, ξ)

Z2 (h0 )

(4.281)

λ∗ Z2 (S, ξb0 )

where the unlabelled natural transformations are part of the coherence isomorphisms
for Z1 and Z2 .
We set
Z
b
b ξ) ∈ [Z1 (S, ξ), Z2 (S, ξ)]
Z(S, ξ) =
Z(S,
(4.282)
λ∗ Z(S, ξ) := lim
−1
λ

[ξ]

λ−1 [ξ]

writing the limit as an end in the second equality.
Let (Σ, ϕ : Σ −→ BG) : (S− , ξ− ) −→ (S+ , ξ+ ) be a 1-morphism in G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 .
(Σ, ϕ) induces a span of groupoids
λ−1 [ϕ]
r−

r+

λ−1 [ξ− ]
10

(4.283)
λ−1 [ξ+ ]

We thank the referee of [52] for suggesting this way of interpreting our results.

134

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

We can use the relative field theory Z to construct a natural transformation
λ−1 [ϕ]
b
Z(Σ,ϕ)

λ−1 [ξ− ]

(4.284)

λ−1 [ξ+ ]

b − ,ξ− )
Z2 (Σ,ϕ)◦Z(S

b + ,ξ+ )◦Z1 (Σ,ϕ)
Z(S

[Z1 (S− , ξ− ), Z2 (S+ , ξ+ )]
with component
Z1 (h|−1
)
S

Z1 (S− , ξ− )

−

Z(S,ϕ|
b S− )

λ∗ Z1 (S− , ϕ|
b S− )

λ∗ Z2 (S− , ϕ|
b S− )

Z2 (h|S− )

Z2 (S− , ξ)

Z2 (Σ,ϕ)

Z2 (S+ , ξ+ )

∗

Z1 (Σ,ϕ)

λ Z1 (Σ,ϕ)
b

Z1 (S+ , ξ+ )

∗
b S+ )
−1 λ Z1 (S+ , ϕ|

Z1 (h|S

+

)

Z(Σ,ϕ)
b

λ∗ Z2 (Σ,ϕ)
b

Z(S+ ,ϕ|
b S+ )

λ∗ Z2 (S+ , ϕ|
b S+ )

Z2 (h|S+ )

(4.285)
at an object (ϕ,
b h) ∈ λ−1 [ϕ], where the outer natural transformations are construct
from Lemma 2.112 adjusted to the situation at hand. There is a general push and
pull construction which can be applied in this situation [91] inducing a morphism
Z
Z
b
b + , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ) . (4.286)
λ∗ Z(Σ, ϕ) :
Z2 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ Z(S− , ξ− ) −→
Z(S
λ−1 [ξ− ]

λ−1 [ξ+ ]

Concretely, the morphism λ∗ Z(Σ, ϕ) is given by the composition of the three natural
morphisms
• The natural map


Z
Z

∗ 
b − , ξ− ) ◦ r− (4.287)
b
Z2 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ Z(S
r− 
Z2 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ Z(S− , ξ− ) −→
λ−1 [ϕ]

λ−1 [ξ− ]

R

∗
b
Z
(Σ,
ϕ)
◦
Z(S
,
ξ
)
is a cone
which is induced by noticing that r−
− −
λ−1 [ξ− ] 2
b − , ξ− ) ◦ r− .
over Z2 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ Z(S
• The map
Z
Z
b + , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ r+ (4.288)
b
Z2 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ Z(S− , ξ− ) ◦ r− −→
Z(S
λ−1 [ϕ]

λ−1 [ϕ]

b
induced by the natural transformation Z(Σ,
ϕ).
• The last map
Z
Z
b
b + , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ)
Z(S+ , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ r+ −→
Z(S
λ−1 [ϕ]

λ−1 [ξ+ ]

135

(4.289)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

is a bit more involved and only works because all groupoids involved are essentially finite. Let (ξb+ , h : λξb+ −→ ξ+ ) be an element of λ−1 [ξ+ ]. The homotopy
−1 b
fibre r+
[(ξ+ , h)] has objects consisting of triples of a map
b,
ϕ
b : Σ −→ B G

(4.290)

a gauge transformation (homotopy)
g : λϕ
b −→ ϕ ,

(4.291)

b
h: ϕ
b |S+ −→ ξb+

(4.292)

and a gauge transformation

such that the diagram
h
λ∗ b

λ∗ ϕ
b |S+

λ∗ ξb+
(4.293)
h

g|S+

ξ+
commutes. An object (ϕ,
b g, b
h) induce a morphism
Z
b + , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ r+ −→ Z(S
b + , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ)[ϕ|
Z(S
b S+ , g|S+ ]
νϕ,g,
b b
h:
λ−1 [ϕ]

b + ,ξ+ )◦Z1 (Σ,ϕ)[b
Z(S
h]

b + , h]
b + , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ)[ξ|
−−−−−−−−−−−−→ Z(S
(4.294)
where the first morphism is part of the universal cone for the limit. A simple
calculation [91] shows that the resulting morphism is well defined on isomor−1 b
phism classes of r+
[(ξ+ , h)] allowing us to define the morphism
Z
X
νϕ,g,
b b
h
:=
νϕ,g,
νξb+ ,h =
(4.295)
b b
h
b
|Aut(
ϕ,
b
g,
h)|
−1 b
(ϕ,g,
b b
h)∈π0 (r+
[(ξ+ ,h)])
−1 b
(ϕ,g,
b b
h)∈r+
[(ξ+ ,h)]
R
b + , h]. It is
b + , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ r+ to Z(S
b + , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ)[ξ|
from λ−1 [ϕ] Z(S
straightforward to verify that these morphism form a cone for the diagram
b + , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ) [91] inducing the desired morphism.
Z(S
The functors Z1 (Σ, ϕ) and Z2 (Σ, ϕ) are continuous and hence λ∗ Z(Σ, ϕ) can be seen
as a morphism Z2 (Σ, ϕ) ◦ λ∗ Z(S− , ξ− ) −→ λ∗ (S+ , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ, ϕ).
We can now state the main theorem of this section
136

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

b −→ G be a group homomorphism between finite groups
Theorem 4.296. Let λ : G
b
and λ : G-Cob
n,n−1,n−2 −→ G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 the induced functor between bicategories.
Furthermore, let Z1 , Z2 : G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC be extended functorial field theories. There is a relative pushforward construction λ∗ : [ tr λ∗ Z1 , tr λ∗ Z2 ] −→ [ tr Z1 , tr Z2 ]
generalizing the pushforward construction of [72].
Proof. The proof of this theorem consists of 4 largely independent parts.
1. Construction of the missing natural isomorphisms: We start by providing the additional data required for an relative field theory, see Definition 2.64
and A.27. First we construct a natural isomorphism
Z2 (∅)

VectC
Mλ∗ Z

(4.297)
λ∗ Z(∅)

Z1 (∅)
Note that the homotopy fibre of the empty bundle over the empty set only contains
one element and one morphism. For this reason we can set Mλ∗ Z = MZ , where MZ
is the natural transformation which is part of the relative field theory Z.
The final data missing to complete the construction of λ∗ Z are natural isomorphisms
Z1 (S1 , ξ1 )  Z1 (S2 , ξ2 )
Z(S1 ,ξ1 )Z(S2 ,ξ2 )

Z1 (S1 t S2 , ξ1 t ξ2 )

Z2 (S1 , ξ1 )  Z2 (S2 , ξ2 )
To construct this map we use that
Z
Z
b
b 2 , ξ2 ) ∼
Z(S1 , ξ1 ) 
Z(S
=
λ−1 [ξ1 ]

λ−1 [ξ2 ]

Z(S1 tS2 ,ξ1 tξ2 )

Πλ∗ Z

(4.298)

Z2 (S1 t S2 , ξ1 t ξ2 )
Z
b 1 , ξ1 )  Z(S
b 2 , ξ2 ) ,
Z(S

(4.299)

λ−1 [ξ1 ]×λ−1 [ξ2 ]

and λ−1 [ξ1 ] × λ−1 [ξ2 ] ∼
= λ−1 [ξ1 t ξ2 ]. The continuity of all functors involved allows us
to compute the limits in the functor category [Z1 (S1 , ξ1 )  Z1 (S2 , ξ2 ), Z2 (S1 t S2 , ξ1 t
ξ2 )]. The natural isomorphism ΠZ induces a natural transformation between the
two diagrams under consideration which induces the map Πλ∗ Z between the limits.
The compatibility conditions for MZ and ΠZ ensure that Mλ∗ Z and Πλ∗ Z satisfy the
appropriate compatibility conditions (Definition A.27).
2. Gauge invariance of λ∗ Z(Σ, ϕ): We now turn our attention to the definition
of λ∗ Z on morphisms. Let (Σ, ϕ1 : Σ −→ BG) and (Σ, ϕ2 : Σ −→ BG) be morphisms
in G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 such that there exists a homotopy relative boundary h : ϕ1 −→ ϕ2 .
The homotopy induces an equivalence
λ−1 [ϕ1 ] −→ λ−1 [ϕ2 ]
(4.300)
(ϕ,
b H : λϕ
b −→ ϕ1 ) 7−→ (ϕ,
b h ◦ H : λϕ
b −→ ϕ2 )
137

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

such that
λ−1 [ϕ1 ]
r−1

r+1

λ−1 [ξ− ]

(4.301)

λ−1 [ξ+ ]
r−2

r+2

λ−1 [ϕ2 ]
commutes. Furthermore, the equivalence is compatible with the natural transformation from Equation 4.284 (this follows from the invariance of Z under homotopies
relative boundary) and hence the induced natural transformations λ∗ Z(Σ, ϕ1 ) and
λ∗ Z(Σ, ϕ2 ) agree.
3. Compatibility with composition: Let (Σ1 , ϕ1 ) : (S− , ξ− ) −→ (S, ξ) and
(Σ2 , ϕ2 ) : (S, ξ) −→ (S+ , ξ+ ) be 1-morphisms in G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 . The most involved
part of the proof is to show that
Z2 (Σ2 , ϕ2 ) ◦ Z2 (Σ1 , ϕ1 ) ◦ λ∗ Z(S− , ξ− )

λ∗ Z(Σ1 ,ϕ1 )

ΦZ2

Z2 (Σ2 ◦ Σ1 , ϕ2 ◦ ϕ1 ) ◦ λ∗ Z(S− , ξ− )

(4.302)

Z2 (Σ2 , ϕ2 ) ◦ λ∗ Z(S, ξ) ◦ Z1 (Σ1 , ϕ1 )

λ∗ Z(Σ2 ◦Σ1 ,ϕ2 ◦ϕ1 )

λ∗ Z(Σ2 ,ϕ2 )

λ∗ Z(S+ , ξ+ ) ◦ Z1 (Σ2 ◦ Σ1 , ϕ2 ◦ ϕ1 )

ΦZ1

λ∗ Z(S+ , ξ+ ) ◦ Z2 (Σ2 , ϕ2 ) ◦ Z1 (Σ1 , ϕ1 )

commutes. Using continuity we see that the left composition is constructed from the
span
λ−1 [ϕ2 ◦ ϕ1 ]
λ−1 [ξ− ]

Φ•idZb

b
Z(Σ,ϕ)

b − ,ξ− )
Z2 (Σ2 ,ϕ2 )◦Z2 (Σ1 ,ϕ1 )◦Z(S

λ−1 [ξ+ ]

(4.303)

b + ,ξ)◦Z1 (Σ2 ◦Σ1 ,ϕ2 ◦ϕ1 )
Z(S

[Z1 (S− , ξ− ), Z2 (S+ , ξ+ )]
On the other hand the right composition is constructed via push and pull operations
from the diagram
λ−1 [ϕ1 ]
λ−1 [ξ− ]

λ−1 [ϕ2 ]

b 1 ,ϕ1 )
idZ2 (Σ2 ) •Z(Σ

λ−1 [ξ]

b 2 ,ϕ2 )•id
id •ΦZ1 ◦Z(Σ

λ−1 [ξ+ ]

[Z1 (S− , ξ− ), Z2 (S+ , ξ+ )]

(4.304)
138

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

By the equivariant Beck-Chevalley condition [91, Proposition 2.3] this composition
agrees with the linearisation of the span
λ−1 [ϕ1 ] ×λ−1 [ξ] λ−1 [ϕ2 ]
ζ

λ−1 [ϕ1 ]
λ−1 [ξ− ]

b 1 ,ϕ1 )
idZ2 (Σ2 ) •Z(Σ

λ−1 [ξ]

λ−1 [ϕ2 ]
b 2 ,ϕ2 )•id
id •ΦZ1 ◦Z(Σ

λ−1 [ξ+ ]

[Z1 (S− , ξ− ), Z2 (S+ , ξ+ )]

(4.305)
where λ [ϕ1 ] ×λ−1 [ξ] λ [ϕ2 ] is the homotopy pullback and ζ the canonical natural isomorphism corresponding to it, see Appendix B. There is an equivalence of
groupoids
−1

−1

Ξ : λ−1 [ϕ1 ◦ ϕ2 ] −→ λ−1 [ϕ1 ] ×λ−1 [ξ] λ−1 [ϕ2 ]
.

(4.306)

(ϕ
b1,2 , h : λϕ
b1,2 −→ ϕ1 ◦ ϕ2 ) 7−→ (ϕ
b1,2 |Σ1 , h|Σ1 , ϕ
b1,2 |Σ2 , h|Σ2 , idϕb1,2 |S )
The statement now follows from checking that the pullback along Ξ of the natural
transformation in Equation 4.305 agrees with the natural transformation in Equation 4.303. We check this explicitly by evaluation the natural transformation at an
object (ϕ
b1,2 , h : λϕ
b1,2 −→ ϕ1 ◦ ϕ2 ):

139

Z1 (Σ2 ◦Σ1 ,ϕ2 ◦ϕ1 )

Z1 (S− , ξ− )

Z1 (S+ , ξ+ )

140
Z1 (S+ , ξ+ )

Z1 (h|−1
S )

ϕb
1

+

1,

Σ

2◦

Σ

+

Z1 (h|−1
S )

Z(S,ϕ
b1,2 |S )

,2
)

Z1 (S+ , ξ+ )

ΦZ1

λ∗ Z1 (S, ϕ
b1,2 |S )

id

λ∗ Z2 (S+ , ϕ
b1,2 |S+ )

id

λ∗ Z2 (S+ , ϕ
b1,2 |S+ )

Z2 (Σ2 ◦Σ1 ,ϕ2 ◦ϕ1 )

ΦZ2

Z2 (S, ξ)

Z(S+ ,ϕ
b1,2 |S+ )

Z(S+ ,ϕ
b1,2 |S+ )

Z(Σ2 ,ϕ
b1,2 |Σ2 )

λ∗ Z2 (S, ϕ
b1,2 |S )

Z2 (S− , ξ− )

λ∗ Z1 (S+ , ϕ
b1,2 |S+ )

Z2 (h|S− )

Z(S,ϕ
b1,2 |S )

Z(Σ1 ,ϕ
b1,2 |Σ1 )

λ∗ Z2 (S− , ϕ
b1,2 |S− )

Z2 (S, ξ)

Z2 (h|S )

Z2 (S+

Z2 (S+ , ξ

Z2 (h|S )

Z2 (Σ2 ,ϕ2 )

λ∗ Z2 (S+ , ϕ
b1,2 |S+ )

Z2 (h|S )

Z2 (Σ1 ,ϕ1 )

Z(Σ2 ,ϕ
b1,2 |Σ2 )

λ∗ Z2 (S, ϕ
b1,2 |S )

Z2 (S− , ξ− )

λ∗ Z1 (S+ , ϕ
b1,2 |S+ )

k (Z is a relative field theory)

Z1 (h|−1
S )

1(

λ∗
Z

Z1 (S+ , ξ+ )

λ∗ Z1 (S, ϕ
b1,2 |S )

Z2 (h|S− )

k (Coherence of Z1 and Z2 )

Z(S− ,ϕ
b1,2 |S− )

Z1 (Σ2 ,ϕ2 )

λ∗ Z1 (S− , ϕ
b1,2 |S− )

id

Z1 (S, ξ)

Z(Σ1 ,ϕ
b1,2 |Σ1 )

λ∗ Z2 (S− , ϕ
b1,2 |S− )

Z(S− ,ϕ
b1,2 |S− )

λ∗ Z1 (S− , ϕ
b1,2 |S− )

1)

ϕ

2◦

ϕ

1,

Σ

2◦

Σ

1(

Z

Z1 (h|−1
S− )

ΦZ1

−

Z1 (h|−1
S )

Z1 (Σ1 ,ϕ1 )

Z1 (S− , ξ− )

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Z1 (S− , ξ− )

ϕ1

Z1 (S+ , ξ+ )

)

+

Z1 (h|−1
S )

1 (Σ
2 ◦Σ
1 ,ϕ
b1
,2

λ ∗Z
)

Z1 (S+ , ξ+ )

Z2 (h|S− )

Z(S+ ,ϕ
b1,2 |S+ )

Z(Σ1 ,ϕ
b1,2 |Σ1 )

λ∗ Z2 (S− , ϕ
b1,2 |S− )

Z(S− ,ϕ
b1,2 |S− )

λ∗ Z1 (S− , ϕ
b1,2 |S− )

1 ,ϕ
2◦

Σ

1 (Σ
2◦

Z

−

Z1 (h|−1
S )

λ∗ Z2 (S+ , ϕ
b1,2 |S+ )

Z2 (S− , ξ− )

Z2 (Σ2 ◦Σ1 ,ϕ2 ◦ϕ1 )

ΦZ2

Z2 (S, ξ)

(4.307)

Z2 (S+ , ξ+ )

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

141

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

This shows that the natural transformation agree and hence finishes this part of
the proof.
4. Compatibility with identity morphisms: Finally, we have to show that
λ∗ Z(S, ξ)
idλ∗ Z(S,ξ) •ΦZ1 (S,ξ)

ΦZ2 (S,ξ)•idλ∗ Z(S,ξ)

Z2 (idS,ξ ) ◦ λ∗ Z(S, ξ)

(4.308)

λ∗ Z(S, ξ) ◦ Z1 (idS,ξ )

λ∗ Z(idS,ξ )


commutes. Using continuity the morphism λ∗ Z(idS,ξ ) ◦ ΦZ2 (S, ξ) • idλ∗ Z(S,ξ) is induced by the natural transformation
λ−1 [ξ]
[0,1]×·

λ−1 [[0, 1] × ξ]
(4.309)
b S,ξ )◦ΦZ (S,ξ)
Z(id
2

λ−1 [ξ]

λ−1 [ξ]

b
Z(S,ξ)

b
Z(S,ξ)◦Z
1 (idS,ξ )

[Z1 (S, ξ), Z2 (S, ξ)]
where [0, 1] × · : λ−1 [ξ] −→ λ−1 [[0, 1] × ξ] is an equivalence and hence we can also use
the upper span to compute the morphism. Since all maps in the span are equivalences
the induced map via push and pull agrees with the map induced by the natural
transformation. Hence we have to evaluate the natural transformation
id

Z1 (S, ξ)

Z1 (h−1 )

b Z(S,ξ) λ∗ Z2 (S, ξ)
b
λ Z1 (S, ξ)
b

∗

Z1 (idS,ξ )

Z2 (h)

ΦZ2
Z2 (idS,ξ )

Z2 (S, ξ)

Z(idS,ξb)

Z1 (S, ξ)

Z2 (h)

∗

Z1 (h

Z2 (S, ξ)

∗

b
λ Z1 (S, ξ)
−1
)

b
λ Z2 (S, ξ)

b
Z(S,ξ)

(4.310)
Using the coherence of Z2 we can rewrite this as
Z1 (S, ξ)

Z1 (h−1 )

b
λ∗ Z1 (S, ξ)

b
Z(S,ξ)

b
λ∗ Z2 (S, ξ)

∗

λ Z2 (id)

Z1 (S, ξ)

∗

Z1 (h−1 )

b
λ Z1 (S, ξ)

Z2 (S, ξ)

ΦZ2 id

Z(idS,ξb)

Z1 (idS,ξ )

Z2 (h)

b
Z(S,ξ)

142

b
λ∗ Z2 (S, ξ)

(4.311)
Z2 (h)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

Using that Z satisfies the condition we want to check for λ∗ Z we get
Z1 (S, ξ)

Z1 (h−1 )

b
λ∗ Z1 (S, ξ)

b
Z(S,ξ)

b
λ∗ Z2 (S, ξ)

Z2 (h−1 )

Z2 (S, ξ)

ΦZ1 id
Z1 (idS,ξ )
λ Z1 (id)

Z1 (S, ξ)

Z1 (h)

(4.312)
b
Z(S,ξ)

∗

b
λ∗ Z1 (S, ξ)

Finally, we use the coherence of Z1 to simplify the expression to
id

Z1 (S, ξ) ΦZ1

Z1 (id)

Z1 (S, ξ)

Z1 (h−1 )

b
λ∗ Z1 (S, ξ)

b
Z(S,ξ)

b
λ∗ Z2 (S, ξ)

Z2 (h−1 )

Z2 (S, ξ)

(4.313)

Now the statement follows from the continuity of Z1 (idS,ξ ).
Remark 4.314. If both extended field theories Z1 and Z2 are trivial our construction
reduces to the pushforward construction of [72] by applying Corollary 2.87.
Using the pushforward construction of relative field theories we can now define
the anomalous quantum field theory Zω0 : 1 =⇒ tr Eθ : recall from Proposition 4.67
that ω 0 induces a natural isomorphism tr E0 =⇒ tr Eδω0 = tr λ∗ Eθ composition with
the natural transformation Ω0 from Equation (4.78) gives the relative field theory
Zbω0 : 1 =⇒ tr Eδω0 = tr λ∗ Eθ . We set Zω0 := λ∗ Zbω0 .
Similarly to the proof of Theorem 4.196, one can show that the relative field
theory Zω0 gauges the G-symmetry. Let us explain in more detail what this means:
the pullback i∗ Eθ along the inclusion i : Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 is naturally isomorphic to the trivial theory 1 : Cobn,n−1,n−2 −→ 2VectC . The pullback
i∗ Zω0 : 1 =⇒ tr i∗ Eθ ∼
= 1 is a field theory relative to the trivial theory. From Corollary 2.87 it follows that i∗ Zω0 is an n − 1 dimensional topological quantum field
theory. This field theory comes with an internal G-symmetry from the evaluation of
Zω0 on gauge transformations of the trivial bundle. Gauging the symmetry means
that the field theory i∗ Zω0 recovers the Dijkgraaf-Witten theory Zω together with its
internal symmetry induced by the group extensions
ι
λ
b −→
1 −→ D −→ G
G −→ 1 .

(4.315)

Next we will spell out explicitly the pushforward construction for Zω and recover
the formulas from [52]: Let (S, ξ) be an object in G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 . The pushforward
construction of relative field theories evaluated at (S, ξ) is
Zω0 (S, ξ) : VectC −→ Eθ
Z
C 7−→

Z σ+ ∈Fund(S) Z

.
h

([0, 1] × S) (σ+ , σ) ∗ σ+
−1 [ξ]
b
(ξ,h)∈λ

σ∈Fund(S)

(4.316)
143

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

The limit over σ can be computed by evaluation at σ+ . The limit over λ−1 [ξ] can
be computed in vector spaces. We can identify ([0, 1] × S)h (σ+ , σ+ ) with C using
the canonical basis element [0, 1] × σ+ of ([0, 1] × S)h (σ+ , σ+ ). Under this identification the natural transformation (see Equation (4.281)) corresponds to multiplication
with h b
h∗ ω 0 , [0, 1] × σ+ i · τS θ(λ∗b
h, h0 )−1 , where we used Theorem 4.95 to identify the
coherence isomorphism of Eθ with the transgression of θ.
The whole construction assembles into a functor


.
(4.317)
Lξ,ω0 : Fundθ (S, ξ)op −→ λ−1
∗ [ξ], VectC
0
be representatives for the fundamental class of S and Λ ∈ Cn−1 (S)
Let σ+ and σ+
0
− σ+ , i.e. a morphism in Fundθ (S, ξ). The natural
an n−1-chain satisfying ∂Λ = σ+
transformation corresponding to Λ under the trivialisation picked above is
0
Lξ,ω0 (Λ) : Lξ,ω0 (σ+
) =⇒ Lξ,ω0 (σ+ )

L

ξ,ω 0

(Λ)(ξ,h)
b : C −→ C ,

−1
−1
1 7−→ ξb∗ ω 0 , Λ
h∗ θ, [0, 1] × Λ
.

(4.318)

We denote by Z̃ (S,ξ) : Fund(S)opp −→ VectC the limit of Lξ,ω0 over λ−1 [ξ]. Using this
notation Equation (4.316) reduces to
Z σ∈Fund(S)

Z̃ (S,ξ) (σ) ∗ σ ∈ Eθ (S, ξ) .

(4.319)

This reproduces the definition from [52] on objects11 .
To evaluate the theory Zω0 on a 1-morphisms (Σ, ϕ) : (S− , ξ− ) −→ (S+ , ξ+ ) in
G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 , we describe the functors in Equation (4.284) evaluated at C ∈ VectC .
The source of the natural transformation Zbω0 is
λ−1 [ϕ] −→ Eθ (S+ , ξ+ )
σ+ ∈Fund(S
)
+ ) σ− ∈Fund(S
−Z
Z
Z

(ϕ,
b h) 7−→

([0, 1] × S− )h|S− (σ− , σ) ⊗ Σϕ (σ+ , σ− ) ∗ σ+
.

σ∈Fund(S− )

∼
=

σ+ ∈Fund(S
+ ) σ− ∈Fund(S
−)
Z
Z

Σϕ (σ+ , σ− ) ⊗ Lξ− ,ω0 (σ− , ϕ|
b S− , h|S− ) ∗ σ+
(4.320)

To be more precise in [52] the term τS θ(λ∗ b
h, h0 )−1 is not present. However, the term is trivial
−1
on automorphisms b
h in λ [ξ] because they need to satisfy λ∗ b
h = 1 and hence its inclusion does
not change the limit. Note that this kind of argument works also in general
11

144

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

The target is
λ−1 [ϕ] −→ Eθ (S+ , ξ+ )
.

σ+ ∈Fund(S
+)
Z

(ϕ,
b h) 7−→

(4.321)

Lξ+ ,ω0 (σ+ , ϕ|S
b + , h|S+ ) ∗ σ+

The natural transformation is induced by the linear maps
Σϕ (σ+ , σ− ) ⊗ Lξ− ,ω0 (σ− , ϕ|
b S− , h|S− ) −→ Lξ+ ,ω0 (σ+ , ϕ|S
b + , h|S+ )

(4.322)

Λ ⊗ 1 7−→ hϕ
b∗ ω 0 , Λi · hh∗ θ, [0, 1] × Λi
For a concrete realisation of the map induced by this natural transformation in terms
of parallel sections we refer to [52]. There we also show directly by long and explicit
computations that the concrete formulas define a relative field theory. Here it is
ensured abstractly by Theorem 4.296.
Remark 4.323. Let S be a closed oriented n−2-dimensional manifold and σS a
representative of its fundamental class. The general theory outlined in Section 2.2.2
(S, · )
implies that the vector spaces Z̃ω (σS ) form a projective representation of BunG (S).
The 2-cocycle α twisting the projective representation is completely described by the
coherence isomorphisms for Eθ . Theorem 4.95 shows that the 2-cocycle twisting this
representation is given by the transgression of θ ∈ Z n (BG; U (1)) to the groupoid
BunG (S). This generalizes the low-dimensional descriptions of anomalies and projective representations on state spaces discussed in [156, Section 2.1]: In the simplest n = 1 case, with S = {∗} the 2-cocycles α and θ may be identified, and describe the same 2-cocycle specifying both the two-dimensional bulk G-symmetry protected phase and the class of the projective G-representation on the one-dimensional
boundary state, whereas for n = 3 with S = S1 transgression induces a homomorphism H 3 (BG; U (1)) −→ H 2 (B(G//G); U (1)) specifying the two-dimensional Gsymmetry protected phase on the boundary of the three-dimensional G-symmetry protected phase.
In a more geometric language this means that the state spaces of the gauged
theory form a section of the transgression 2-line bundle of the flat n−1-gerbe on the
classifying space BG described by θ, as the classical gauge theory corresponding to
θ describes the parallel transport for the n−1-gerbe. This 2-line bundle is trivial if
and only if the corresponding 2-cocycle is a boundary. Hence the obstruction for the
projective representation to form an honest representation is the non-triviality of the
transgression 2-line bundle.
Remark 4.324. Let (Σ, ϕ) : (S, ξ) −→ ∅ be a 1-morphism in G-Cobn,n−1,n−2 . According to (2.111) the state space of the composite system is given by
(S,ϕ| )
Zω0 bb (Σ, ϕ, S) = Eθ (Σ, ϕ)[Zω0 (S, ϕ|S )] ∼
= Σϕ (∅, σS ) ⊗C Z̃ω0 S (σS ) .

145

(4.325)

Chapter 4: ’t Hooft anomalies of discrete gauge theories

It is independent of the choice of σS up to unique isomorphism corresponding to the
choice of a representative of the coend. The composite state space carries an honest
representation of the gauge group G described in (2.117).

146

Appendix A
Symmetric monoidal bicategories
In this appendix we provide detailed definitions related to symmetric monoidal bicategories, following [55, 157] for the most part.

A.1

Basic definitions

We list the basic definitions for bicategories following [157].
Definition A.1. A bicategory B consists of the following data:
(a) A class Obj(B) of objects.
(b) A category HomB (A, B) for all A, B ∈ Obj(B), whose objects f : A −→ B we
call 1-morphisms and whose morphisms f =⇒ g we call 2-morphisms.
(c) Composition functors
◦ABC : HomB (B, C) × HomB (A, B) −→ HomB (A, C)
for all A, B, C ∈ Obj(B).
(d) Identity functors
IdA : 1 = ?



{id? } −→ HomB (A, A)

for all A ∈ Obj(B).
(e) Natural associator isomorphisms
aA,B,C,D : ◦ACD ◦ idHomB (C,D) × ◦ABC



=⇒ ◦ABD ◦ ◦BCD × idHomB (A,B)

for all A, B, C, D ∈ Obj(B), expressing associativity of the composition.
(f ) Natural right and left unitor isomorphisms

rA : ◦AAB ◦ idHomB (A,B) ×IdA =⇒ idHomB (A,B)
and

lA : ◦AAB ◦ IdB × idHomB (A,B) =⇒ idHomB (A,B)
for all A, B ∈ Obj(B).
147



Chapter A: Symmetric monoidal bicategories

These data are required to satisfy the following coherence axioms:
(C1) The pentagon diagram
a•id


(k◦h)◦g ◦f


k◦(h◦g) ◦f
a

a

(k◦h)◦(g◦f )

k◦ (h◦g)◦f
a



id •a


k◦ h◦(g◦f )
(A.2)

commutes for all composable 1-morphisms k, h, g and f , where • denotes the
horizontal composition of natural transformations.
(C2) The triangle diagram
a

(g ◦ Id) ◦ f

g ◦ (Id ◦ f )
(A.3)
id •l

r•id

g◦f
commutes for all composable 1-morphisms f and g.
There are different definitions for functors between bicategories corresponding to
different levels of strictness. We use the following definition.
Definition A.4. A 2-functor F : B −→ B 0 between two bicategories B and B 0
consists of the following data:
(a) A map F : Obj(B) −→ Obj(B 0 ).

(b) A functor FAB : HomB (A, B) −→ HomB0 F(A), F(B) for all A, B ∈ Obj(B).
(c) A natural isomorphism ΦABC given by
◦

HomB (B, C) × HomB (A, B)

HomB (A, C)

ΦABC

FBC ×FAB



HomB0 F(B), F(C) × HomB0 F(A), F(B)

FAC
◦0


HomB0 F(A), F(C)
(A.5)

for all A, B, C ∈ Obj(B).
(d) A natural isomorphism ΦA given by
1

IdA

HomB (A, A)

ΦA

FAA

id

1

Id0F (A)


HomB0 F(A), F(A)

for all A ∈ Obj(B).
148

(A.6)

Chapter A: Symmetric monoidal bicategories

These data are required to satisfy the following coherence axioms:
(C1) The diagram

F(h) ◦0 F(g) ◦0 F(f )

Φ•0 id

F(h ◦ g) ◦0 F(f )

Φ

F (h ◦ g) ◦ f

a0



F (a)


F(h) ◦0 F(g) ◦0 F(f )

id •0 Φ

F(h) ◦0 F(g ◦ f )

(A.7)


F h ◦ (g ◦ f )

Φ

commutes for all composable 1-morphisms.
(C2) The diagram
F(f ) ◦0 Id0F (A)

id •0 Φ

F(f ) ◦0 F(IdA )

Φ

F(f ◦ IdA )
(A.8)

F (r)

r0

F(f )
commutes for all composable 1-morphisms.
(C3) A diagram analogous to (A.8) for the left unitors l and l0 commutes.
Again there are different ways to define natural transformations between 2functors. The following definition is suitable for our purposes.
Definition A.9. Given two 2-functors F, G : B −→ B 0 , a natural 2-transformation
σ : F =⇒ G consists of the following data:
(a) A 1-morphism σA : F(A) −→ G(A) for all A ∈ Obj(B).
(b) A natural transformation σAB given by1
FAB

HomB (A, B)

σAB

GAB

HomB0 G(A), G(B)


∗
σA


HomB0 F(A), F(B)
σB∗

(A.10)


HomB0 F(A), G(B)

for all A, B ∈ Obj(B). In particular, these natural transformations comprise
families of 2-morphisms σf : GAB (f )◦0 σA =⇒ σB ◦0 FAB (f ) for all 1-morphisms
f : A −→ B in B.
These data are required to satisfy the following coherence axioms:
1

Here we use ∗ to denote pullbacks and pushforwards in the usual way.

149

Chapter A: Symmetric monoidal bicategories

(C1) The diagram
a0


G(g) ◦0 G(f ) ◦0 σA

G(g) ◦0 G(f ) ◦0 σA

id •0 σf




G(g) ◦0 σB ◦0 F(f )

ΦG •0 id

a0

G(g ◦ f ) ◦0 σA


G(g) ◦0 σB ◦0 F(f )
σg •0 id

σg◦f

σC ◦0 F(g ◦ f )

id •0 ΦF


σC ◦0 F(g) ◦0 F(f )

a0


σC ◦0 F(g) ◦0 F(f )
(A.11)

commutes for all 1-morphisms f : A −→ B and g : B −→ C in B.
(C2) The diagram
Id0G(A) ◦0 σA

l0

σA

r0−1

σA ◦0 Id0F (A)

ΦG •0 id

G(IdA ) ◦0 σA

id •0 ΦF

(A.12)

σA ◦0 F(IdA )

σIdA

commutes for all A ∈ Obj(B).
Remark A.13. We do not require the natural transformation σAB to be invertible.
There is a different definition of natural transformation where σAB goes in the other
direction. In the literature these two versions are called lax and op-lax [50]. In this
thesis we never use op-lax transformations and hence refrain from introducing the
term lax.
In the context of bicategories there exist a natural way to compare natural transformations.
Definition A.14. Given two natural 2-transformations σ, τ : F =⇒ G, a modification Γ : σ V τ consists of a 2-morphism ΓA : σA =⇒ τA for each A ∈ Obj(B) such
that the diagram
G(f ) ◦0 σA

id •0 ΓA

G(f ) ◦0 τA

σf

σB ◦0 F(f )

τf
ΓB •0 id

(A.15)

τB ◦0 F(f )

commutes for all 1-morphisms f : A −→ B in B.
The collection of all bicategories, 2-functors, natural transformations and modifications forms a tricategory BiCat [158].

150

Chapter A: Symmetric monoidal bicategories

A.2

Symmetric monoidal bicategories

In this Section we define symmetric monoidal structures on bicategories following [55].
Definition A.16. A symmetric monoidal bicategory consists of a bicategory B together with the following data:
(a) A monoidal unit 1 ∈ Obj(B).
(b) A 2-functor ⊗ : B × B −→ B.
(c) Equivalence natural 2-transformations2 α : ⊗ ◦(id ×⊗) =⇒ ⊗ ◦ (⊗ × id), λ : 1 ⊗
· =⇒ id and ρ : id =⇒ · ⊗ 1. We pick adjoint inverses which are part of the
data and denoted them by ? , leaving the adjunction data implicit.
(d) An equivalence natural 2-transformation β : a ⊗ b =⇒ b ⊗ a.
(e) The four invertible modifications
⊗ ◦ (⊗ × ⊗)
α

α

⊗ ◦ (⊗ × id) ◦ (⊗ × id × id)

⊗ ◦ (id ×⊗) ◦ (id × id ×⊗)

Ξ

id ⊗α

α⊗id

⊗ ◦ (⊗ × id) ◦ (id × ⊗ × id)

⊗ ◦ (id ×⊗) ◦ (id × ⊗ × id)
(A.17)

⊗ ◦ ( · ⊗ 1) × id
(A.18)
ρ⊗id

α
α


⊗ ◦ id ×(1 ⊗ · )
id ⊗λ

Θ

⊗

⊗

id

⊗ ◦ (1 ⊗ · ) × id

λ⊗id



Λ

α

⊗
λ

(A.19)

(1 ⊗ · ) ◦ (id ×⊗)
and
id ⊗ρ

⊗
ρ


⊗ ◦ id ×( · ⊗ 1)

Ψ

α

(A.20)

( · ⊗ 1) ◦ (id ×⊗)
2

Here ‘equivalence’ means the natural 2-transformations in question have weak inverses.

151

Chapter A: Symmetric monoidal bicategories

(f ) Further invertible modifications
a ⊗ (b ⊗ c)

β

(b ⊗ c) ⊗ a

α

α

(a ⊗ b) ⊗ c

(A.21)

b ⊗ (c ⊗ a)

R

id ⊗β

β⊗id

(b ⊗ a) ⊗ c

b ⊗ (a ⊗ c)

α

and
(a ⊗ b) ⊗ c

β

c ⊗ (a ⊗ b)

α

α

a ⊗ (b ⊗ c)

(A.22)

(c ⊗ a) ⊗ b

S

β⊗id

α◦(β⊗id)◦α

b ⊗ (a ⊗ c)

(a ⊗ c) ⊗ b

β

(g) An invertible modification
id

a⊗b

a⊗b
(A.23)

Σ

β

β

b⊗a
These data are required to satisfy a long list of coherence diagrams, see [55, Appendix C] for details.
Definition A.24. A symmetric monoidal 2-functor between two symmetric monoidal
bicategories B and B 0 consists of a 2-functor H : B −→ B 0 of the underlying bicategories together with the following data:

(a) Equivalence natural 2-transformations3 χ : ⊗0 ◦ H( · ) × H( · ) =⇒ H ◦ ⊗ and
ι : 10 =⇒ H(1), where here we consider 1 as a 2-functor from the bicategory
with one object, one 1-morphism and one 2-morphism to B.
(b) The three invertible modifications
 id ⊗0 χ
H(a) ⊗0 H(b) ⊗0 H(c)
H(a) ⊗0 H(b ⊗ c)
α0

χ


H(a) ⊗0 H(b) ⊗0 H(c)

H a ⊗ (b ⊗ c)

Ω

χ⊗0 id

H(α)

H(a ⊗ b) ⊗0 H(c)
3

χ

H (a ⊗ b) ⊗ c

We fix again adjoint inverses and the adjunction data.

152





(A.25)

Chapter A: Symmetric monoidal bicategories

H(1) ⊗0 H(a)

χ

ι⊗0 id

10 ⊗0 H(a)

H(a) ⊗0 10

H(1 ⊗ a)
Γ

λ0

and

H(λ)

id ⊗0 ι

ρ0

H(a)

H(a) ⊗0 H(1)
χ

∆

H(a)

H(ρ)

H(a ⊗ 1)

(c) An invertible modification
H(b ⊗ a)
H(β)

χ

H(b) ⊗0 H(a)

H(a ⊗ b)

Υ

(A.26)

χ

β0
0

H(a) ⊗ H(b)
These data are required to satisfy a long list of coherence conditions, see [55] and
references therein for details.
Our definition of symmetric monoidal transformations differs slightly from [55].
The definition we give is tailored to the application in functorial field theories. In
contrast to the definition given in [55], we require the appearing modifications to
be invertible. However, the 2-morphisms corresponding to the underlying natural
transformations are not invertible in our definition, so our definition is also weaker
than the definition given in [55].
Definition A.27. A natural symmetric monoidal 2-transformation between symmetric monoidal 2-functors H, K : B −→ B 0 consists of a natural 2-transformation
θ : H =⇒ K of the underlying 2-functors together with invertible modifications
H(a ⊗ b)
χH

θ

H(a) ⊗0 H(b)

K(a ⊗ b)

Π

θ⊗0 id

(A.28)

χK

K(a) ⊗0 H(b)

K(a) ⊗0 K(b)

id ⊗0 θ

and

ιK

10
ιH

K(1)
(A.29)

M
θ

H(1)

153

Chapter A: Symmetric monoidal bicategories

which satisfy the following coherence conditions expressed as equalities between 2morphisms (omitting tensor product symbols on objects and 1-morphisms to streamline the notation):

K(a) K(b)H(c)

 0
K(a) K(b)K(c) α

θ


(K(a)K(b) K(c)

α0

χK
θ


K(a)K(b) H(c)

K(ab)K(c)

χK
θ

K(ab)H(c)

θ


K(a)H(b) H(c)

χK

K (ab)c

θ

0

Π⊗ id



Π
θ

H(ab)H(c)

θ
χH

K(α)

χH


H(a)H(b) H(c)


H (ab)c

ΩH

K a(bc)

θα



H(α)
α0

θ


H(a) H(b)H(c)

H(c)H(bc)

χH

χH

H(a(bc))

k

K(a) K(b)H(c)

θ

K(a) K(b)K(c)

 α0

α0


K(a)K(b) K(c)
χK

α0


K(a)K(b) H(c)

K(a) K(b)K(c)



K(ab)K(c)

χK
θ

χK

χK

θ

α0 ?

ΩK

id ⊗0 Π


K(a)H(b) H(c)


K (ab)c

K(a)K(bc)
α0

α0 ?



H(a)H(b) H(c)

χH

θ

χK

θ


K(a) H(b)H(c)

θ

Π


K a(bc)

K(a)H(bc)

Φ⊗0

θ

α0


H(a) H(b)H(c)

χH

K(α)

H(a)H(bc)

θ
χH

H a(bc)



(A.30)

154

Chapter A: Symmetric monoidal bicategories

θ

K(1)H(a)
θ

K(1)K(a)
χK

Π
χH

H(1)H(a)
ιH

H(λ)

ΓH

10 H(a)

θ

H(1a)

K(a)

θ

λ0θa

θ

K(λ)

θ

H(a)

λ0

K(1a)

λ0

10 K(a)

k
θ

K(1)H(a)

K(1)K(a)
χK

θ

H(1)H(a)

K(1a)

M −1 ⊗0 id

Φ⊗0

ιK

ιH

ιK

K(λ)

ΓK

10 H(a)

K(a)
λ0

θ

10 K(a)
K(a)10

ιH

ρ0

ιθ

θ

K(a)

ρ0θ
ρ0

θ

K(a)H(1)

H(a)10

ιH

H(a)H(1)

K(a)K(1)
Π

χH

∆−1
H
H(ρ)

H(a)

θ

θ

H(a1)

θρ
θ

K(ρ)

K(a)

k

155

θ

χK

K(a1)

(A.31)

Chapter A: Symmetric monoidal bicategories

ιH

K(a)10

K(a)H(1)

ρ0

θ
id ⊗0 M −1

K(a)

ιK

θ

∆−1
K

K(a)K(1)

H(a)

(A.32)

χK

K(ρ)

K(a1)

id
θ

K(ρ)

K(a)
and
χH

H(b)H(a)
id

H(b)H(a)

χH

H(ba)
θ
θβ

H(ab)

id

=

K(ba)

θ

H(a)H(b)

K(β)

Π

K(a)K(b)

θ◦0 β 0

H(β)

−1
ΥH
◦0 β 0

θ◦0 β 0

χH ◦0 β 0

H(a)H(b)

Π

θ

K(b)K(a)

χK

β0

θ

K(ab)

χK

0
βθ⊗
0θ

H(ba)

K(β)

−1
ΥK

K(a)K(b)

K(ba)

K(ab)
(A.33)

χK

In (A.30), the unlabelled 2-morphisms in the first diagram are constructed from naturality of α? and 2-functoriality of ⊗, while the unlabelled 2-morphism in the second
diagram is induced by the equivalence α? ◦ α =⇒ id.
Definition A.34. A symmetric monoidal modification between two symmetric monoidal
2-trans-formations θ, θ0 : H =⇒ K consists of a modification m : θ V θ0 of the underlying natural 2-transformations satisfying
χH

H(a) ⊗0 H(b)

H(a ⊗ b)

Π

θ⊗0 θ

m
θ

K(a) ⊗0 K(b)

θ0

=

χH

m⊗m

Π0

θ⊗0 θ

θ 0 ⊗0 θ 0

K(a) ⊗0 K(b)

K(a ⊗ b)

χK

H(a) ⊗0 H(b)

H(a ⊗ b)
θ0

χK

K(a ⊗ b)

(A.35)
and
H(1)

H(1)

ιH

ιH
M

10

θ

m

θ0

=

M0

10

ιK

θ0

ιK

K(1)

K(1)

156

(A.36)

Appendix B
Homotopy theory for groupoids,
stacks and integration
In this appendix we review some basic facts and definitions related to groupoids used
in this thesis. We start by defining a model structure on the category of groupoids.
We give concrete formulas for homotopy (co)limits in this model structure.
Afterwards, we define stacks as a categorification of sheaves and state some of
there basic properties. The final section of this appendix is dedicated to the integration of gauge invariant functions over groupoids.

B.1

A model category for groupoids

In many situation requiring two objects of a category C to be isomorphic is to restrictive and there exists a class of morphisms called weak equivalences which should
replace isomorphisms. For example from a homotopical point of view two topological
spaces are ‘the same’ if there exist a weak homotopy equivalence between them. Let
W ⊂ Mor(C) denote the collection of weak equivalences. In this case the localization
C[W −1 ] of C at the weak equivalences is a natural object to consider. Furthermore,
one should replace categorical structures, such as limits, Kan extensions and equivalences of categories with constructions which are compatible with weak equivalences.
To get a better technical handle on weak equivalences the introduction of two
additional classes of morphisms called fibrations and cofibrations is useful. We are
mostly interested in the case where C is a category enriched over the category sSet of
simplicial sets. The relevant definition in this situation is that of an simplical model
category, see for example [159, Section 11.4]. We do not spell out the definition
in detail here, but rather explain to what it boils down in the case of groupoids.
There is a simplicial model structure on the category of (small) groupoids Grpd
which we review following [160]. The category Grpd becomes enriched over sSet as
follows: the simplex category ∆ of finite ordered sets and order preserving maps
embeds into the category Cat of categories by sending a finite ordered set S to the
category which has one object for every element of S and exactly one morphism
157

Chapter B: Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration

from s1 ∈ S to s2 ∈ S if and only if s1 ≤ s2 . The simplicial nerve of a category C
is the simplicial set N C• := HomCat (•, C). The simplicial nerve functor admits a left
adjoint h : sSet −→ Cat which can be constructed via left Kan extension
∆

Cat
(B.1)
h

sSet
We denote by Π : sSet −→ Grpd the composition of h with the functor Cat −→ Grpd
which sends a category to the groupoid constructed by inverting all morphisms. The
simplicial mapping space between two groupoids G and G0 is N ([G, G0 ]) where we
denote by [G, G0 ] the category of functors from G to G0 . Now we can describe the
simplicial model category on Grpd. We denote by ∆1 and ∆0 the image of [1] and
[0] under the embedding ∆ ,→ Cat, respectively. Furthermore, let I be the groupoid
with two objects and one isomorphisms between them.
Definition B.2. A functor G −→ G0 between groupoids is a
• weak equivalence if it is an equivalence of categories,
• cofibration if it is injective on objects,
• fibration if every diagram of the form
∆0

G
(B.3)

0

∆1

G0

admits a lift ∆1 −→ G.
This defines a simplical model structure on Grpd, see e.g. [160].
Remark B.4. The lift in (B.3) is not required to be unique. There is a special
class of functors between groupoids which admits unique lifts: A surjective fibration
G −→ G0 of groupoids for which all lifts in (B.3) are unique is called a covering
of groupoids. Coverings will play an essential role in the study of integration over
finite groupoids in Section B.3. Let n be a natural number. An n-folded covering is
a covering where the fibre over every point contains n elements.
Being a simplicial model category, implies in particular that Grpd is tensored and
cotensored (see [159, Section 3.7]) over sSet, i.e. there are functors
⊗ : sSet × Grpd −→ Grpd
(B.5)
S × G 7−→ S ⊗ G := Π(S) × G

158

Chapter B: Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration

and
−· : sSetopp × Grpd −→ Grpd
(B.6)
S

S × G 7−→ G := [Π(S), G]
such that there are natural isomorphism
N ([S ⊗ G, G0 ]) ∼
= MapsSet (S, N ([G, G0 ])) ∼
= N ([G, G0S ])

(B.7)

defining a two-variable adjunction ( see e.g. [161, Definition 4.1.12] for the definition).
(Co)limits in Grpd are in general not compatible with equivalences of categories:
consider the equivalence of diagrams
∆0 t ∆0
∆0 t ∆0

∆0
∆0
(B.8)

∆0
I
The pushout of the diagram containing I is the groupoid ∗//Z, while the pushout
of the other diagram is ∆0 . Homotopy (co)limits solve this problem1 by replace the
categorical concept of (co)limits with a homotopy invariant definition. One way to
define homotopy (co)limits is via the introduction of a model structure on diagram
categories, such as the projective, injective or Reedy model structure [159, 161].
These model structures only exist under certain conditions on the model category or
the shape of the diagram category.
The approach we use is via a concrete definition using the two-sided bar construction [159]. Let D be a small category. We now construct homotopy limits and
colimits over D as functors holim, hocolim : GrpdD −→ Grpd, where we denote by
GrpdD the category of diagrams of shape D in Grpd. Every object in Grpd is fibrant
and cofibrant, meaning that the unique map to the terminal object 1 is a fibration and the unique map from the initial object ∅ is a cofibration. For this reason
our formulas will not involve pointwise (co)fibrant replacements of diagrams. Let
F : D −→ Grpd be a diagram in Grpd. We introduce the simplicial groupoid
a
Bn (?, D, F ) :=
F (d0 ) ,
(B.9)
d~: [n]→D
1

Alternatively, the problem could be solved by working in a 2-categorical setting; replacing
(co)limts with their 2-categorical analogues.

159

Chapter B: Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration

where d~ is a string of morphisms d0 → d1 → · · · → dn in D. The degeneracy maps are
induced from the degeneracy maps of the nerve of D and reindexing the coproduct.
The face maps are constructed from the face maps in the nerve of D and the map
F (d0 → d1 ) : F (d0 ) −→ F (d1 ) for ∂0 . The homotopy colimit of F is the geometric
realisation of B• (?, D, F ), i.e. the coend
Z n∈∆
∆n ⊗ Bn (?, D, F )

hocolim F =

where ∆n corresponds to the Yoneda embedding ∆ −→ [∆opp , Set].
To define homotopy limits we introduce the cosimplicial groupoid
Y
C n (?, D, F ) :=
F (dn )

(B.10)

(B.11)

d~: [n]→D

with face and degeneracy maps dual to those of B• (?, D, F ). The homotopy limit is
the totalization of C • (?, D, F ), i.e. the end
Z
C n (?, D, F )∆n .
(B.12)
holim F :=
n∈∆

We conclude this section with an example relevant in the main text.
Consider the diagram F
G
(B.13)

f2

G0

f1

B

in Grpd. The nerve of the underlying diagram category D is 1-skeletal. This implies
that the cosimplical object C • (?, D, F ) is 1-skeletal [159, Example 6.5.2.] and hence
we can compute its totalization as the end over ∆[1] ⊂ ∆. To compute the end we
use
C 0 (?, D, F ) = G × B × G0 and C 1 (?, D, F ) = G × B × G0 × Bf1 × Bf2 ,

(B.14)

where the subscript denotes the morphism indexing the product (components without
index correspond to identity maps). The homotopy limit is the equalizer of the
following diagram (using Proposition 3.92)
i,j≤1
0

1

I

C (?, D, F ) × C (?, D, F ) ⇒

Y

C j (?, D, F )Π(∆i )

(B.15)

d : [i]→[j]

An element of C 0 (?, D, F )×C 1 (?, D, F )I consists of elements g ∈ G, b ∈ B, g 0 ∈ G0 and
morphisms h : g1 −→ g2 ∈ G, hb : b1 −→ b2 ∈ B, h0 : g10 −→ g20 ∈ G0 , hf1 : b3 −→ b4 ∈
B and hf2 : b5 −→ b6 ∈ B. There are 3 morphisms in ∆[1] contributing non-trivially
160

Chapter B: Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration

to the equalizer: s0 : [1] −→ [0], d0 : [0] −→ [1] and d1 : [0] −→ [1]. Evaluating the
two morphisms corresponding to s0 implies the relations h = idg , h0 = idg0 and
hb = idb . Evaluating the maps corresponding to d0 and d1 implies b6 = b4 = b,
f1 (g) = b3 and f2 (g 0 ) = b5 . After imposing all these conditions an element in the
equalizer can be represented by the diagram
f2 (g 0 )
hf2

f1 (g)

hf1

(B.16)

b

A morphisms consists of three maps g1 −→ g2 , g10 −→ g20 and b1 −→ b2 making the
obvious diagram commute. The information contained in the element b is obsolete.
We can define an equivalent groupoid with objects pairs of elements g ∈ G and
g 0 ∈ G0 together with an isomorphism f2 (g 0 ) −→ f1 (g). The equivalence between
the groupoids sends (B.16) to (g, g 0 , h−1
f1 ◦ hf2 ). We call this simplified groupoid
the homotopy pullback of the diagram (B.13) and denote it by G ×B G0 . There
are projection maps G ×B G0 −→ G and G ×B G0 −→ G0 fitting into a homotopy
commutative square
G ×B G0
G0
h
(B.17)
f2
G

f1

B

The homotopy (natural isomorphism) h is constructed from the morphisms f2 (g 0 ) −→
f1 (g).
Homotopy fibres can be defined as special cases of homotopy pullbacks: let
F : G −→ G0 be a functor between groupoids and g 0 ∈ G0 . The homotopy fibre
of g 0 F −1 [g 0 ] is the homotopy pullback
F −1 [g 0 ]

G
h

∆0

g0

f2

(B.18)

G0

Definition B.19. Let G be a groupoid. G is essentially finite if the set of isomorphism classes of objects π0 (G) and all automorphism groups are finite. We denote by
FinGrpd the category of essentially finite groupoids.
For later use we record the following observation.
Lemma B.20. Let F : G −→ G0 be a functor between essentially finite groupoids, g 0 ∈
G0 and Gg0 the subgroupoid consisting of elements g in G such that F (g) isomorphic
to g 0 . Then F −1 [g 0 ] −→ Gg0 is an |Aut(g 0 )|-fold covering.
161

Chapter B: Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration

B.2

Stacks

Let G be a Lie group and M a manifold. Principal G-bundles on M are local
in the following sense: let {Ui }i∈I be an open covering of M . Then from principal
bundles Pi on Ui together with gauge transformations ϕij : Pi |Uij −→ Pj |Uij satisfying
ϕik = ϕjk ◦ ϕij on Uijk with Uij := Ui ∩ Uj and Uijk := Ui ∩ Uj ∩ Uk , we can construct
a principal G-bundle on M . Furthermore, all principal bundles can be constructed
up to gauge transformation from local data. This can be captured by the statement
that the natural functor
BunG (M ) −→ Desc({Ui })

(B.21)

is an equivalence of groupoids, where Desc({Ui }) is the groupoid of local data {Pi , ϕij }
with respect to the open cover Ui . A stack is an abstraction of this locality property.
Stacks are defined over categories with a notion of “coverings”. These categories are
called sites.
Definition B.22. Let C be a category. A Grothendieck topology2 on C is a class of
morphisms in C called coverings such that
• every isomorphism is a covering,
• the pullback of a covering along an arbitrary morphisms in C exist and is again
a covering, and
• the composition of coverings is a covering.
A category together with the choice of a Grothendieck topology is called a site.
Example B.23. We are mostly interested in the following example. Let n be a
positive integer and Mann the category of n-dimensional manifolds (with corners).
There is a Grothendieck topology on Mann where a covering of a manifold M ∈ Mann
`
∼
=
is a map of the form Y −→ U = i∈I Ui −→ M where the first morphism is an
isomorphism and {Ui }i∈I is an open covering of M .
There is a different Grothendieck topology on Mann where the coverings are surjective submersions. These two Grothendieck topology are equivalent in an appropriate
sense [162]. This implies in particular that the notion of a stack with respect to both
Grothendieck topology agrees.
Let f : M −→ N be a smooth map between smooth manifolds. The map f
induces a pullback functor f ∗ : BunG (N ) −→ BunG (M ). For two composable morphisms f and g the functors (f ◦ g)∗ and g ∗ ◦ f ∗ are only isomorphic, or in different
words BunG (·) : Manopp −→ Grpd is only a 2-functor, where Manopp is considered as
a 2-category with only identity 2-morphisms.
Definition B.24. Let C be a category. A pre-stack F on C is a 2-functor
F : Copp −→ Grpd .
2

What we define is sometimes called a pretopology.

162

(B.25)

Chapter B: Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration

The following definition should be understood as a generalization of the category
Desc({Ui }) to pre-stacks on a site.
Definition B.26. Let C be a site, F : Copp −→ Grpd a pre-stack on C and π : Y −→
X a covering. The covering π allows us to define the following simplicial object
· · · Y [3]

Y [2]

∂0

Y

(B.27)

∂1

where Y [n] is the iterated fibre product Y ×X Y · · · ×X Y . The descent category
DescF (Y ) has as objects pairs (fY , ϕ : ∂1∗ fY −→ ∂0∗ fY ), where fY is an element of
F (Y ) and ϕ is a morphism F (∂1 )[fY ] −→ F (∂0 )[fY ] in F [Y [2] ] satisfying (suppressing coherence isomorphisms) F (∂2 )[ϕ] ◦ F (∂0 )[ϕ] = F (∂1 )[ϕ] in F (Y [3] ).
A morphism (fY , ϕ : ∂1∗ fY −→ ∂0∗ fY ) −→ (fY0 , ϕ0 : ∂1∗ fY0 −→ ∂0∗ fY0 ) in DescF (Y )
consists of a morphism g : f −→ f 0 such that (suppressing coherence isomorphisms)
F (∂0 )[g] ◦ ϕ = ϕ ◦ F (∂1 )[g] holds in F (Y [2] ).
Remark B.28. For a pre-stack F : Copp −→ Grpd, which is a strict 2-functor, the
homotopy limit of the diagram
· · · F (Y [3] )

F (Y [2] )

F (Y )

(B.29)

is the descent category DescF (Y ). It is possible to strictify a pre-stack, hence for
theoretical discussions one can restrict to strict functors. In this set up it is possible
to define a model structure on [Copp , Grpd] related to stacks [160]. However, the
disadvantage of working with strict pre-stacks is that most examples do not naturally
appear as strict functors. For this reason, we continue to work with 2-functors.
Now we can define stacks.
Definition B.30. Let C be a site. A pre-stack F : Copp −→ Grpd is a stack if for
every covering π : Y −→ X the canonical map F (X) −→ Desc(Y ) is an equivalence
of categories.
Example B.31.
• Every sheaf F : Copp −→ Set is a stack by considering a set
as a groupoid with only identity morphisms.
• Let Mann be the category of n-dimensional manifolds and G a Lie group. Principal G-bundles with and without connections define stacks BunG (·) : Manopp
−→
n
∇
opp
Grpd and BunG (·) : Mann −→ Grpd.
• For some types of geometric structure it might be necessary to restrict to a
subclass of morphisms of Mann . For example, orientations can only be pulled
back along local diffeomorphisms. Throughout this thesis we do not specify
the kind of morphisms we restrict to explicitly. They should be clear from the
context.

163

Chapter B: Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration

Remark B.32. When considering a stack F we implicitly pick the following additional structure: for every surjective submersion π : Y −→ M , weak adjoint inverses
to the canonical map F (M ) −→ DescF (Y ) where DescF (Y ) is the category of descent data associated to π. For every refinement
Y1
π1

M

f

(B.33)

π2

Y2
we get a natural functor f ∗ : DescF (Y2 ) → DescF (Y1 ) for which we pick a weak
adjoint inverse. The adjointness condition is essential for ensuring naturality of
constructions using descent properties.

B.3

Integration over essentially finite groupoids

The space of field configuration in a gauge theory is a groupoid. Morphisms correspond to gauge transformations. When performing the path integral one has to
carefully take these internal symmetries into account. For essentially finite groupoids,
there exists a well defined integration theory, which we use in Chapter 4 to construct
finite gauge theories. In the following we review the integration over essentially
groupoids following Appendix A. of [72].
For essentially finite groupoids there exists a canonical notion of cardinality.
Proposition/Definition B.34. There exists a unique map |·| : Obj(FinGrpd) −→ Q
satisfying
(G1) The equation |∆0 | = 1 holds.
(G2) For equivalent essentially finite groupoids G and G0 . The equation |G| = |G0 |
holds.
(G3) For groupoids G, G0 ∈ FinGrpd we denote by G t G0 there disjoint union. The
equation |G t G0 | = |G| + |G0 | holds.
(G4) Let G −→ G0 be an n-fold covering of groupoids. The equation |G| = n · |G0 |
holds.
We call | · | the groupoid cardinality. Concretely, |G| is given by
|G| =

X
x∈π0 (G)

1
,
|Aut(x)|

(B.35)

where |Aut(x)| denotes the cardinality of the automorphism group of an arbitrary representative for the isomorphism class x. Moreover, the groupoid cardinality satisfies
|G × G0 | = |G| × |G0 |.
164

Chapter B: Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration

Proof. Condition (G2) and (G3) imply that | · | is completely determined by its
values on groupoids of the from ?//G with one object ? and a finite group G as
automorphisms. Consider the |G|-fold covering EG −→ ?//G, where EG is the
action groupoid corresponding to the action of G on itself via left multiplication.
1
.
EG is contractible and hence we find | ? //G| = |G|
0
0
The equation |G × G | = |G| × |G | follows from a direct calculation using (B.35).
The groupoid cardinality induces a natural counting measure which can be used
to integrate gauge invariant functions over essentially finite groupoids.
Definition B.36. Let G be an essentially finite groupoid. A function f : Obj(G) −→
C is gauge invariant if it is constant on isomorphism classes. The integral of f over
G is
Z
Z
X
f (x)
f=
f (x) d x :=
.
(B.37)
|Aut(x)|
G
G
x∈π0 (G)

There are results for integration over essentially finite groupoids which are analogues of statements in Lebesgue integration theory. We conclude this section by
proving these results.
Proposition B.38 (Cavalieris principle). Let φ : G −→ G0 be a functor of essentially
finite groupoids. Then
Z
|G| =
|φ−1 [x]| d x .
(B.39)
G0

Proof. Without loss of generality we can assume that G0 is ?//G. By Lemma B.20
the forgetful functor φ−1 [?] −→ G is an |G| fold covering. (G3) now implies
Z
|G||G|
|φ−1 [?]|
=
= |G| .
(B.40)
|φ−1 [?]| =
|G|
|G|
?//G

There is a slight generalisation of Cavalieris principle, which turns out to be useful
in practice.
Proposition B.41 (Generalised Cavalieris principle). Let φ : G −→ G0 be a functor
of essentially finite groupoids and f : Obj(G) −→ C a gauge invariant function. Then

Z
Z Z
∗
f (x) d x =
qy f (x) d x d y ,
(B.42)
G

G0

φ−1 [y]

where qy : φ−1 [y] −→ G is the obvious forgetful functor.

165

Chapter B: Homotopy theory for groupoids, stacks and integration

Proof. Every gauge invariant function can be written as a linear combination of delta
functions
(
1 , if g ∼
=x
δx : G −→ C , g 7−→
.
(B.43)
0 , otherwise
Hence it is enough to prove the statement for delta functions. In this case the statement reduces to Proposition B.38 applied to the groupoid Gx of elements isomorphic
to x.

166

Bibliography
[1] V. Corts and A. S. Haupt, Mathematical Methods of Classical Physics, Springer
Briefs in Physics, 2017.
[2] K. Costello and O. Gwilliam. Factorization algebras in quantum field theory
Volume 2, 2016.
[3] I. A. Batalin and G. A. Vilkovisky, Quantization of Gauge Theories with Linearly Dependent Generators, Phys. Rev. D 28 (1983) 25672582.
[4] B. Juro, L. Raspollini, C. Saemann, and M. Wolf, L∞ -Algebras of Classical
Field Theories and the Batalin-Vilkovisky Formalism, Fortschritte der Physik
67 (2019) 1910025.
[5] M. E. Peskin and D. V. Schroeder, An Introduction to quantum field theory,
Addison-Wesley, 1995.
[6] K. Costello, Renormalization and effective field theory, Mathematical Surveys
and Monographs Volume 170, American Mathematical Society, 2011.
[7] E. Noether, Invariant Variation Problems, Gott. Nachr.(1918) 235257.
[8] S. L. Adler, Axial vector vertex in spinor electrodynamics, Phys. Rev. 177
(1969) 24262438.
[9] J. S. Bell and R. Jackiw, A PCAC puzzle: π → γγ in the σ-model, Il Nuovo
Cimento A 60 (1969) 4761.
[10] R. A. Bertlmann, Anomalies in quantum field theory, International series of
monographs on physics: 91, 1996.
[11] E. Witten, Fermion path integrals and topological phases, Rev. Mod. Phys. 88
(2016) 035001.
[12] A. Kapustin and R. Thorngren, Anomalies of discrete symmetries in various
dimensions and group cohomology, Preprint(2014).
[13] P. C. Nelson and L. Alvarez-Gaume, Hamiltonian Interpretation of Anomalies,
Comm. Math. Phys. 99 (1985) 103114.
167

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[14] D. S. Freed and G. W. Moore, Twisted Equivariant Matter, Ann. Henri
Poincaré 14 (2013) 19272023.
[15] S. Bunk and R. J. Szabo, Topological insulators and the Kane-Mele invariant:
Obstruction and localization theory, Preprint(2017).
[16] X. Chen, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen, Local unitary transformation, long-range
quantum entanglement, wavefunction renormalization, and topological order,
Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010) 155138.
[17] D. S. Freed, Short-range entanglement and invertible field theories,
Preprint(2014).
[18] D. S. Freed and M. J. Hopkins, Reflection positivity and invertible topological
phases, Preprint(2016).
[19] X. Chen, Z.-C. Gu, Z.-X. Liu, and X.-G. Wen, Symmetry-protected topological
orders and the group cohomology of their symmetry group, Phys. Rev. B 87
(2013) 155114.
[20] A. Kapustin and A. Turzillo, Equivariant topological quantum field theory and
symmetry-protected topological phases, J. High Energy Phys. 03 (2017) 6.
[21] X.-G. Wen, Classifying gauge anomalies through symmetry-protected trivial orders and classifying gravitational anomalies through topological orders, Phys.
Rev. D 88 (2013) 045013.
[22] D. Gaiotto and A. Kapustin, Spin TQFTs and fermionic phases of matter, Int.
J. Mod. Phys. A 31 (2016) 1645044.
[23] Y. Wan, J. C. Wang, and H. He, Twisted gauge theory model of topological
phases in three dimensions, Phys. Rev. B 92 (2015) 045101.
[24] I. Cong, M. Cheng, and Z. Wang, Defects between gapped boundaries in twodimensional topological phases of matter, Phys. Rev. B 96 (2017) 195129.
[25] I. Cong, M. Cheng, and Z. Wang, Hamiltonian and algebraic theories of gapped
boundaries in topological phases of matter, Comm. Math. Phys. 355 (2017)
645689.
[26] H. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Hu, and Y. Wan, Gapped boundary theory of the twisted
gauge theory model of three-dimensional topological orders, J. High Energy
Phys. 10 (2018) 114.
[27] M. Levin and Z.-C. Gu, Braiding statistics approach to symmetry-protected
topological phases, Phys. Rev. B 86 (2012) 115109.

168

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[28] D. Gaiotto and T. Johnson-Freyd, Symmetry-protected topological phases and
generalized cohomology, J. High Energy Phys. 2019 (2019) 007, 34.
[29] Q.-R. Wang and Z.-C. Gu, Towards a Complete Classification of SymmetryProtected Topological Phases for Interacting Fermions in Three Dimensions
and a General Group Supercohomology Theory, Phys. Rev. X 8 (2018) 011055.
[30] S. Ryu, J. E. Moore, and A. W. W. Ludwig, Electromagnetic and gravitational
responses and anomalies in topological insulators and superconductors, Phys.
Rev. B 85 (2012) 045104.
[31] S. Ryu and S.-C. Zhang, Interacting topological phases and modular invariance,
Phys. Rev. B 85 (2012) 245132.
[32] C. G. Callan, Jr. and J. A. Harvey, Anomalies and fermion zero modes on
strings and domain walls, Nucl. Phys. B 250 (1985) 427436.
[33] L. D. Faddeev and S. L. Shatashvili, Realization of the Schwinger term in the
Gauss law and the possibility of correct quantization of a theory with anomalies,
Phys. Lett. B 167 (1986) 225228.
[34] M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Topological insulators, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82 (2010)
30453067.
[35] X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Topological insulators and superconductors, Rev.
Mod. Phys. 83 (2011) 10571110.
[36] D. S. Freed, Anomalies and invertible field theories, Proc. Symp. Pure Math.
88 (2014) 2545.
[37] S. Monnier, Hamiltonian anomalies from extended field theories, Comm. Math.
Phys. 338 (2015) 13271361.
[38] S. Monnier, A Modern Point of View on Anomalies, Fortschritte der Physik
67 (2019) 1910012.
[39] D. S. Freed and G. W. Moore, Setting the quantum integrand of M-theory,
Comm. Math. Phys. 263 (2006) 89132.
[40] K. Yonekura, On the cobordism classification of symmetry protected topological
phases, Comm. Math. Phys. 368 (2019) 11211173.
[41] M. F. Atiyah and F. Hirzebruch. Vector bundles and homogeneous spaces, .
In Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. III 738. American Mathematical Society,
Providence, R.I.1961.
[42] I. Garcı́a-Etxebarria and M. Montero, Dai-Freed anomalies in particle physics,
J. High Energy Phys. 2019 (2019) 003.
169

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[43] S. Monnier, The anomaly field theories of six-dimensional (2, 0) superconformal
theories, Preprint(2017).
[44] D. S. Freed and M. J. Hopkins,
Preprint(2019).

M-Theory anomaly cancellation,

[45] M. F. Atiyah, Topological quantum field theory, Publ. Math. IHS 68 (1988)
175186.
[46] G. B. Segal. The definition of conformal field theory, . In Differential Geometrical Methods in Theoretical Physics 165171. Springer Netherlands1988.
[47] M. Kapranov and V. Voevodsky, Braided monoidal 2-categories and ManinSchechtman higher braid groups, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 92 (1994) 241267.
[48] D. S. Freed and C. Teleman, Relative quantum field theory, Comm. Math. Phys.
326 (2014) 459476.
[49] S. Stolz and P. Teichner, Supersymmetric field theories and generalized cohomology, Proc. Symp. Pure Math. 83 (2011) 279340.
[50] T. Johnson-Freyd and C. Scheimbauer, (Op)lax natural transformations,
twisted quantum field theories, and even higher Morita categories, Adv. Math.
307 (2017) 147223.
[51] L. Mller and R. J. Szabo, Extended quantum field theory, index theory and the
parity anomaly, Comm. Math. Phys. 362 (2018) 10491109.
[52] L. Mller and R. J. Szabo, t Hooft Anomalies of Discrete Gauge Theories and
Non-abelian Group Cohomology, Comm. Math. Phys.(online first)(2019).
[53] J. Lurie, On the classification of topological field theories, Current Devel.
Math.) 129280.
[54] D. Calaque and C. Scheimbauer, A note on the (∞, n)-category of cobordisms,
Algebr. Geom. Topol. 19 (2) (2018) 533655.
[55] C. J. Schommer-Pries, The classification of two-dimensional extended topological field theories, Ph.D. Thesis(2011).
[56] D. Fiorenza and A. Valentino, Boundary conditions for topological quantum
field theories, anomalies and projective modular functors, Comm. Math. Phys.
338 (2015) 10431074.
[57] A. J. Niemi and G. W. Semenoff, Axial anomaly induced fermion fractionization
and effective gauge theory actions in odd-dimensional spacetimes, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 51 (1983) 2077.

170

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[58] L. Alvarez-Gaumé, S. Della Pietra, and G. W. Moore, Anomalies and odd
dimensions, Ann. Phys. 163 (1985) 288317.
[59] Ü. Ertem, Index of Dirac operators and classification of topological insulators,
J. Physics Comm. 1 (2017) 035001.
[60] P. Loya and R. B. Melrose, Fredholm perturbations of Dirac operators on manifolds with corners, Preprint(2002).
[61] P. Loya, Index theory of Dirac operators on manifolds with corners up to codimension two, Operator Theory: Adv. Appl. 151 (2004) 131169.
[62] M. F. Atiyah, V. K. Patodi, and I. M. Singer, Spectral asymmetry and Riemannian geometry I, Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 77 (1975) 4369.
[63] A. N. Redlich, Parity violation and gauge non-invariance of the effective gauge
field action in three dimensions, Phys. Rev. D 29 (1984) 23662374.
[64] P. Loya, Dirac operators, boundary value problems, and the b-calculus, Contemp. Math. 366 (2005) 241280.
[65] M. Lesch and K. P. Wojciechowski, On the η-invariant of generalized AtiyahPatodi-Singer boundary value problems, Illinois J. Math. 40 (1996) 3046.
[66] L. D. Faddeev, Operator anomaly for the Gauss law, Phys. Lett. B 145 (1984)
8184.
[67] L. D. Faddeev and S. L. Shatashvili, Algebraic and Hamiltonian methods in
the theory of nonabelian anomalies, Theor. Math. Phys. 60 (1985) 206217.
[68] J. Mickelsson, Chiral anomalies in even and odd dimensions, Comm. Math.
Phys. 97 (1985) 361370.
[69] L. Müller and L. Woike, Parallel transport of higher flat gerbes as an extended
homotopy quantum field theory, J. Homotopy Relat. Struct. (online first)(2019).
[70] R. Dijkgraaf and E. Witten, Topological gauge theories and group cohomology,
Comm. Math. Phys. 129 (1990) 393429.
[71] D. S. Freed and F. Quinn, Chern-Simons theory with finite gauge group, Comm.
Math. Phys. 156 (1993) 435472.
[72] C. Schweigert and L. Woike, Orbifold construction for topological field theories,
J. Pure Appl. Algebra 223 (2019) 11671192.
[73] C. Schweigert and L. Woike, Extended homotopy quantum field theories and
their orbifoldization, to appear in J. Pure Appl. Algebra(2018).

171

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[74] R. Dijkgraaf, V. Pasquier, and P. Roche, Quasi-Hopf algebras, group cohomology and orbifold models, Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 18 (1990) 6072.
[75] S. Willerton, The twisted Drinfeld double of a finite group via gerbes and finite
groupoids, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 8 (2008) 14191457.
[76] J. C. Wang, X.-G. Wen, and E. Witten, Symmetric gapped interfaces of SPT
and SET states: Systematic constructions, Phys. Rev. X 8 (2018) 031048.
[77] G. B. Segal, Three roles of quantum field theory, Felix Klein Lectures(2011).
[78] G. Laures, On cobordism of manifolds with corners, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
352 (2000) 56675688.
[79] J. Hesse, C. Schweigert, and A. Valentino, Frobenius algebras and homotopy
fixed points of group actions on bicategories, Theory Appl. Categ. 32 (2017)
652681.
[80] M. Schulman, Constructing symmetric monoidal bicategories, Preprint(2010).
[81] L. W. Hansen and M. Schlman, Constructiong symmetric monoidal bicategories
functorially, Preprint(2019).
[82] A. Henriques, Three-tier CFTs from Frobenius algebras, Lecture Notes(2013).
[83] J. Morton, Double bicategories and double cospans, J. Homotopy Relat. Str. 4
(2009) 389428.
[84] B. Bartlett, C. L. Douglas, C. J. Schommer-Pries, and J. Vicary, Modular categories as representations of the three-dimensional bordism 2-category,
Preprint(2015).
[85] B. Bakalov and A. A. Kirillov, Jr., Lectures on Tensor Categories and Modular
Functors, American Mathematical Society, 2001.
[86] J. Baez, Higher-dimensional algebra II: 2-Hilbert spaces, Adv. Math. 127
(1997) 125189.
[87] C. Nash, Differential Topology and Quantum Field Theory, Academic Press,
London, 1991.
[88] A. Carey and M. Murray, Mathematical remarks on the cohomology of gauge
groups and anomalies, Preprint(1994).
[89] A. Carey and M. Murray, Faddeev’s anomaly and bundle gerbes, Lett. Math.
Phys. 37(1) (1996) 2936.
[90] A. L. Carey, J. Mickelsson and M. K. Murray, Bundle Gerbes Applied to Quantum Field Theory, Rev. Math. Phys. 12(1) (2000) 6590.
172

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[91] C. Schweigert and L. Woike, A Parallel Section Functor for 2-Vector Bundles,
Theory Appl. Categ. 33(23) (2018) 644690.
[92] L. N. Chang and Y. Liang, Topological anomalies: Explicit examples, Comm.
Math. Phys. 108 (1987) 139152.
[93] M. F. Lapa, Parity anomaly from the Hamiltonian point of view, Physical
Review B 99 (23) (2019) 235144.
[94] H. B. Lawson and M.-L. Michelsohn, Spin Geometry, Princeton University
Press, 1989.
[95] P. Deligne, Notes on Spinors, Lecture Notes).
[96] M. F. Atiyah and I. M. Singer, The index of elliptic operators on compact
manifolds, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 69 (1963) 422433.
[97] R. B. Melrose, The Atiyah-Patodi-Singer Index Theorem, A.K. Peters, Wellesley, 1993.
[98] N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Gapped boundary phases of topological insulators via
weak coupling, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys.(2016) 12C101, 78.
[99] J. C. Wang, Z.-C. Gu, and X.-G. Wen, Field theory representation of gaugegravity symmetry-protected topological invariants, group cohomology and beyond, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 031601.
[100] B. Ammann, R. Lauter, and V. Nistor, On the geometry of Riemannian manifolds with a Lie structure at infinity, Int. J. Math. Sci. 2004 (2004) 161193.
[101] X. Dai and D. S. Freed, η-invariants and determinant lines, C. R. Acad. Sci.
Paris Sér. I Math. 320 (1995) 585591.
[102] W. Müller, η-invariants and manifolds with boundary, J. Diff. Geom. 40 (1994)
181186.
[103] U. Bunke, On the gluing problem for the η-invariant, J. Diff. Geom. 41 (1995)
397448.
[104] S. M. Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician, Graduate Texts in
Mathematics, 1971.
[105] F. Loregian, This is the (co) end, my only (co) friend, Preprint(2015).
[106] J. Fuchs, G. Schaumann, and C. Schweigert, Eilenberg-Watts calculus for finite
categories and a bimodule Radford S4 theorem, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. (online
first)(2019).

173

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[107] M. Ludewig and S. Roos, The Chiral Anomaly of the Free Fermion in Functorial Field Theory, Preprint(2019).
[108] J. C. Wang and X.-G. Wen, Non-abelian string and particle braiding in topological order: Modular SL(3, Z) representation and (3+1)-dimensional twisted
gauge theory, Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015) 035134.
[109] B. Yoshida, Gapped boundaries, group cohomology and fault-tolerant logical
gates, Ann. Phys. 377 (2017) 387413.
[110] H. He, Y. Zheng, and C. von Keyserlingk, Field theories for gauged symmetryprotected topological phases: Non-abelian anyons with abelian gauge group Z32 ,
Phys. Rev. B 95 (2017) 035131.
[111] C. Delcamp, Excitation basis for (3+1)D topological phases, J. High Energy
Phys. 12 (2017) 128.
[112] A. Tiwari, X. Chen, K. Shiozaki, and S. Ryu, Bosonic topological phases of
matter: Bulk-boundary correspondence, symmetry-protected topological invariants, and gauging, Phys. Rev. B 97 (2018) 245133.
[113] X. Wen, H. He, A. Tiwari, Y. Zheng, and P. Ye, Entanglement entropy for
(3+1)-dimensional topological order with excitations, Phys. Rev. B 97 (2018)
085147.
[114] J. C. Morton, Cohomological twisting of 2-linearization and extended TQFT,
J. Homotopy Relat. Struct. 10 (2015) 127187.
[115] D. S. Freed, M. J. Hopkins, J. Lurie, and C. Teleman, Topological Quantum
Field Theories from Compact Lie Groups, Preprint(2009).
[116] P. Deligne, Thorie de Hodge II, IHES Pub. Math. no. 40, 557(1971).
[117] K. Waldorf, Holonomie von Gerben im Wess-Zumino-Witten-Modell, Diploma
thesis(2004).
[118] V. G. Turaev, Homotopy Quantum Field Theory, European Mathematical Society, 2010.
[119] M. B. Young, Orientation Twisted Homotopy Field Theories and Twisted Unoriented Dijkgraaf–Witten Theory, Comm. Math. Phys. (online first)(2019).
[120] G. E. Bredon, Topology and Geometry, Springer Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 1993.
[121] C. Weibel, An introduction to homological algebra, Cambridge studies in advanced mathematics, 1994.

174

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[122] J. Maier, T. Nikolaus, and C. Schweigert, Equivariant modular categories via
Dijkgraaf-Witten theory, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys. 16 (2012) 289358.
[123] G. Karpilovsky, Projective Representations of Finite Groups, Marcel Dekker,
1985.
[124] R. Dijkgraaf, V. Pasquier, and P. Roche, Quasi Hopf algebras, group cohomology and orbifold models, Nucl. Phys. B 18B (1990) 6072.
[125] H.-L. Huang, G. Liu, and Y. Ye, The Braided Monoidal Structures on a Class
of Linear Gr-Categories, Algebr. Represent. Theor. 17 (2014) 12491265.
[126] A. Kapustin and N. Seiberg, Coupling a QFT to a TQFT and duality, J. High
Energy Phys. 04 (2014) 001.
[127] J. C. Wang, L. H. Santos, and X.-G. Wen, Bosonic anomalies, induced fractional quantum numbers and degenerate zero modes: The anomalous edge
physics of symmetry-protected topological states, Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015)
195134.
[128] J. C. Baez and M. Shulman.
Springer New York2010.

Lectures on N-Categories and Cohomology.

[129] V. Blanco, M. Bullejos, and E. Faro, Categorical non-abelian cohomology and
the Schreier theory of groupoids, Math. Z. 251 (2005) 4159.
[130] J. Fuchs, J. Priel, C. Schweigert, and A. Valentino, On the Brauer groups
of symmetries of abelian Dijkgraaf-Witten theories, Comm. Math. Phys. 339
(2015) 385405.
[131] O. Schreier, ber die Erweiterung von Gruppen, Monatsh. Math. Phys, 34(1):165
180,(1926) 165180.
[132]

Nonabelian group cohomology, https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/nonabelian+
group+cohomology, .

[133] D. Roberts and U. Schreiber, The inner automorphism 3-group of a strict 2group, Preprint(2007).
[134] S. X. Cui, C. Galindo, J. Y. Plavnik, and Z. Wang, On Gauging Symmetry of
Modular Categories, Comm. Math. Phys. 348 (2016) 10431064.
[135] S. D. Lentner and J. Priel, A decomposition of the Brauer-Picard group of the
representation category of a finite group, J. Algebra 489 (2017) 264309.
[136] S. D. Lentner and J. Priel, Three natural subgroups of the Brauer-Picard group
of a Hopf algebra with applications, Bull. Belg. Math. Soc. 24 (2017) 73106.

175

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[137] V. G. Turaev and A. Virelizier, On three-dimensional homotopy quantum field
theory II: The surgery approach, Intern. J. Math. 25 (2014) 1450027, 66.
[138] P. I. Etingof, D. Nikshych, V. Ostrik, and E. Meir, Fusion categories and
homotopy theory, Quantum Topol. 1 (2010) 209273.
[139] D. Gaiotto, A. Kapustin, N. Seiberg, and B. Willett, Generalized global symmetries, J. High Energy Phys. 02 (2015) 172, front matter+61.
[140] R. Thorngren and C. von Keyserlingk, Higher SPT’s and a generalization of
anomaly inflow, Preprint(2015).
[141] G. Hochschild and J.-P. Serre, Cohomology of group extensions, Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc. 74 (1953) 110134.
[142] D. Joyner, A primer on computational group homology and cohomology using
GAP and SAGE, Algebr. Discr. Math. 1 (2008) 159191.
[143] J. Huebschmann, Automorphisms of group extensions and differentials in the
Lyndon-Hochschild-Serre spectral sequence, J. Algebra 72 (1981) 296334.
[144] J. Baez and J. Dolan, Higher dimensional algebra and Topological Quantum
Field Theory, J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 60736105.
[145] D. Ayala and J. Francis, The cobordism hypothesis, Preprint(2017).
[146] A. Amabel, A. Kalmykov, L. Mller, and H. L. Tanaka, Lectures on Factorization Homology, Infinity-Categories, and Topological Field Theories, Lecture
Notes(2019).
[147] K. Szer, Two-Dimensional Extended Homotopy Field Theories, Preprint(2019).
[148] N. Carqueville, I. Runkel, and G. Schaumann, Orbifolds of n-dimensional defect
TQFTs, Geom. Topol. 23 (2019) 781864.
[149] J. Fuchs and C. Schweigert, Symmetries and defects in three-dimensional topological field theory, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 597 (2015) 2140.
[150] L. Mller, L. Szegedy, and R. J. Szabo, Symmetry defects and orbifolds of twodimensional Yang-Mills theory, Preprint(2019).
[151] A. Davydov, L. Kong, and I. Runkel, Field theories with defects and the centre
functor, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Field Theory and Perturbative
String Theory, Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, AMS(2011)
71128.
[152] N. Carqueville, C. Meusburger, and G. Schaumann, 3-dimensional defect
TQFTs and their tricategories, Preprint(2016).
176

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[153] N. Carqueville, Lecture notes on 2-dimensional defect TQFT, Lecture
Notes(2016).
[154] J. Frhlich, J. Fuchs, I. Runkel, and C. Schweigert, Defect lines, dualities, and
generalised orbifolds, In P. Exner, editor, Proceedings of the XVI International
Congress on Mathematical Physics, World Scientific,(2010) 608613.
[155] E. Witten, The “parity” anomaly on an unorientable manifold, Phys. Rev. B
94 (2016) 195150.
[156] Y. Tachikawa and K. Yonekura, On time-reversal anomaly of (2+1)D topological phases, Progr. Theor. Exp. Phys. 2017 (2017) 033B04.
[157] T. Leinster, Basic bicategories, Preprint(1998).
[158] R. Gordon, A. Power, and R. Street, Coherence for Tricategories, Memoirs of
the American Mathematical Society, 1995.
[159] E. Riehl, Categorical Homotopy Theory, New Mathematical Monographs 24.
Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[160] S. Hollander, A homotopy theory for stacks, Israel J. Math. 163:93124 163
(2008) 93124.
[161] M. Hovey, Model Categories, Amarican Mathematical Society Mathematical
Surveys and Monographs, 1999.
[162] A. Vistoli, Grothendieck topologies, fibered categories and descent theory, Fundamental algebraic geometry, Math. Surveys Monogr., vol. 123, Amer. Math.
Soc., Providence, 2005.

177

